ALSO BY THE AUTHORS
No Shortcuts to the Top: Climbing the
World’s 14 Highest Peaks

As always, to my loving wife Paula and our
kids—still and forever the best reasons for
coming home.
And also to those who have been inspired
and challengedby the holy grail of
mountaineering that is K2.
Contents
1 | THE MOTIVATOR …
2 | DECISION …
3 | BREAKTHROUGH …
4 | THE GREAT MYSTERY …
5 | BROTHERHOOD …
6 | THE PRICE OF CONQUEST …
7 | THE DANGEROUS SUMMER …
Epilogue: The Holy Grail …
Acknowledgments …
Bibliography …
1
THE MOTIVATOR
In the wee hours of the morning of August
1, 2008, some thirty climbers from ten
different expeditions set out from their high
camps on the Abruzzi Ridge of K2. At
28,251 feet the world’s second-tallest
mountain, K2, thrusts skyward out of the
Karakoram Range of northern Pakistan.
After weeks of sitting out bad weather, the
mountaineers were poised to go for the
summit on a clear and windless day. During
the endless storms, morale at base camp
had reached rock bottom, and some
climbers had thrown in the towel and gone
home. But now everybody still on the
mountain was jazzed. As they emerged
from their cramped tents to clip on
crampons and hoist packs, the climbers
were riding a manic high. Sometime that
day, they thought, they would claim one of
the most elusive and glorious prizes in
mountaineering. For most of these men
and women, K2 was the goal of a lifetime.
Although the various teams were operating
independently, they had tried to cobble
together a common logistical plan that
would help everyone get to the top. The
crucial feature of that plan was the fixing of
thin nylon ropes—to be used on the way
up, in effect, as handrails, and on the way
down as lines that could be easily
rappelled. Those fixed ropes were intended
to ensure the climbers’ passage through
the Bottleneck, a steep and dangerous
couloir of snow and ice that rises from an
altitude of 26,400 feet.
The Bottleneck and the sketchy leftward
traverse at the top of it form the “crux” of
the Abruzzi Ridge. Although climbing the
Bottleneck is only moderately difficult, what
makes that high gauntlet so nerve-racking
is a gigantic serac—a cliff of solid ice—that
looms above it. Weighing many tons,
poised at a vertical and, in places, an
overhanging angle, the serac looks as
though it is barely attached to the
mountain. Yet in the sixty-nine years since
mountaineers first came to grips with this
formidable obstacle, the serac had proved
remarkably stable. It seemed, indeed, to be
a permanent feature of K2’s summit
pyramid.
Thirty climbers crawling up the same route
on the same day would have been
business as usual on Mount Everest. On
K2—a far more serious mountain, and one
that has seen far fewer attempts—such a
crowd was unprecedented. Still, as they
approached the Bottleneck, thanks to the
perfect weather for which they had waited
so long, the climbers were awash in
optimism. The summit was within their
grasp.
And then things started to go subtly wrong.
Small mistakes were made.
Miscommunications, fueled by the many
different languages the climbers spoke,
flared into angry words. The slower
climbers began to block the way for those
who were capable of moving faster. Yet the
single event that turned an awkward day
into a catastrophe was nobody’s fault.
Within the next thirty-six hours, eleven of
those mountaineers would die high on the
Abruzzi Ridge. The disaster that unfolded
on August 1 would end up as the worst
single-event tragedy in the mountain’s
history, and the second worst in the long
chronicle of mountaineering in the
Himalaya and the Karakoram.
And nobody saw it coming.
Almost sixteen years earlier, on August 16,
1992, with my partners Scott Fischer and
Charley Mace, I had left our high camp in
the predawn darkness and started trudging
up toward the Bottleneck. On that day, I,
too, had been full of bursting hope,
tempered by the wary alertness that is the
obligatory state of mind for any alpinist who
wants to stay alive in the great ranges. I
had previously climbed Everest and
Kangchenjunga, the first-and third-highest
peaks in the world, but I knew that K2 was
in another league of difficulty and danger.
Like 2008’s climbers, Scott, Charley, and I
had had to bide our time for interminable
weeks before we finally got a crack at the
summit. Not only storms but all kinds of
logistical snafus and interpersonal conflicts
had delayed our final assault again and
again. It was not until fifty-seven days after
arriving at base camp that we finally set out
for the top. On the other hand, on that
August day in 1992, the three of us had
had the Bottleneck to ourselves. And fixing
ropes up the couloir was not part of our
plan.
In No Shortcuts to the Top, the memoir I
wrote about climbing the world’s fourteen
highest peaks, I devoted a full chapter to
my K2 expedition. Even after K2, it took me
several years before I began to consider
that it might be possible for me to reach the
summit of all fourteen 8,000-meter peaks.
For one thing, I didn’t think there was any
way that I could ever afford to go on so
many expeditions. For another, climbing all
fourteen 8,000ers seemed far too ambitious
a goal. The first person to accomplish that
feat had been the great Tyrolean
mountaineer Reinhold Messner, who
knocked off his fourteenth in 1986. And
Messner was like a god to me.
Yet with K2, I became the first American to
climb the world’s three highest mountains.
The outdoor magazines ran a few short
profiles about me. One of them was titled
“Ed Who?” Even after those pieces
appeared, I was still relatively unknown to
the general public, but with the boost in
confidence they gave me, I finally got up
the nerve to start approaching potential
sponsors.
K2 was a huge turning point in my life. Yes,
it brought me my first modest taste of what
you might call “mountaineering celebrity.”
But far more important than any faint whiff
of fame were the lessons K2 taught me.
In the aftermath of 2008’s disaster, all kinds
of armchair “experts” delivered their
scathing critiques. Nonclimbers clogging
the online chat rooms, in response to
sensational newspaper articles, took a
macabre delight in the tragedy. This was
Everest 1996 all over again, they seemed
to think—the melodrama of clueless
dilettantes who had no business on the
mountain buying their way into a
catastrophe at the cost of their own lives,
as well as the lives of professional guides
entrusted with caring for them. (Hundreds
of readers of Jon Krakauer’s bestseller Into
Thin Air reduced his complicated narrative
to that simplistic morality play.) After the
August 2008 tragedy, Messner himself
sounded off in this vein, decrying the “K2
package deals” that he assumed had lured
novices to the mountain and concluding,
“Something like this is just pure stupidity.”
Messner was not the only famous
mountaineer to criticize the victims of the
2008 disaster. The temptation to secondguess
those luckless climbers’ decisions
was all but irresistible. Newspapers,
magazines, and radio and TV shows called
me for my commentary. I was already
beginning to think that what had happened
on K2 on August 1 was far more
complicated than the first tabloid and
Internet versions of the story. It would take
several weeks for more detailed accounts
to trickle down from the slopes of the
mountain and find their way to responsible
media outlets. And I was not about to cast
facile aspersions on climbers who had died
on the mountain, or had barely survived it.
In 1992, K2 had not only proved to be a
turning point in my life—it had been the
scene of what I still regard as the greatest
mistake I ever made as a mountaineer. The
most important lesson I learned from that
beautiful and dangerous peak was a blunt
one: Don’t ever do that again, if you want to
stay alive. Listen to your instincts, and
follow them.
Recently, I reread my diary from the K2 trip.
I was struck by how different it seemed
from the account I had written in No
Shortcuts. Events and relationships that
seemed really important when they were
happening barely made it into the chapter I
wrote thirteen years after the expedition.
Conversely, some of the most dramatic
turning points of my weeks on K2 got
covered in my diary in only a few deadpan
sentences. I wasn’t writing the diary, of
course, for anybody else to read. At the
time, I thought I was simply making a dayby-
day record of the most ambitious
mountaineering attempt of my life up to that
point.
Now I wonder. Any “story” can be told in
dozens of different ways. For that very
reason, I believe, every time you go back
and reexamine an important chapter in your
life, you learn something new about it. And
the reactions of audiences when I give slide
shows, as well as the e-mails I received
from folks who read No Shortcuts to the
Top, gave me many new insights into my
own experience.
I have always believed that climbing
mountains teaches you lessons. And more
than that, I firmly believe that those lessons
can be applied to the rest of your life. It’s
not an easy process, however.
Mountaineering literature is full of trite
cliches about “conquering an enemy” or
“transcending your limits.” For at least two
centuries, philosophers of the outdoors
have insisted that nature is “a school of
character.”
Would that it were all so simple! The most
important lesson I learned from K2 was that
by simply putting off making a decision, I
made the worst decision of my life: to climb
on into a gathering storm. I was lucky to
survive our summit push on K2. Scott and
Charley didn’t agree with me about this.
That day, they never seemed to suffer from
the nagging doubts—the knot in my gut, as
I’ve always thought of it—I carried with me
hour after hour. Yet my partners’
comparatively blithe attitude about our
climbing on that August 16 doesn’t even
begin to tempt me to revise my judgment.
It’s ultimately a personal thing.
K2 is often called the hardest mountain in
the world. It’s also often called the
deadliest. This may not be strictly true: in
terms of the ratio of climbers who get to the
top compared to those who die on the
mountain, Annapurna is more deadly than
K2. (I succeeded on Annapurna, in fact,
only on my third try, in 2005, and only after
I’d begun to wonder whether it was too
dangerous a peak to justify another
attempt. It became my nemesis—the last of
all the fourteen 8,000ers I was able to
climb.)
Even before I went to K2, however, I had
started calling it “the holy grail of
mountaineering.” It seemed to me to pose
the ultimate challenge in high-altitude
climbing. To prepare for that challenge, I
read everything I could about K2’s history.
I’ve often puzzled over the fact that the
public seems so fixated on Mount Everest.
At one point in 1998, there were about ten
books published in English by climbers who
had been involved in the Everest disaster
two years earlier—not just Krakauer’s Into
Thin Air but memoirs by such survivors as
Beck Weathers, Anatoli Boukreev, Lene
Gammelgaard, and Matt Dickinson.
In the chaotic summer of 1986, thirteen
climbers died on K2, including several who
were among the finest alpinists in the
world. That’s five more than died in the
1996 “killer storm” on Everest. Yet only one
book chronicling the K2 disaster was
published in the United Kingdom or the
United States—Jim Curran’s K2: Triumph
and Tragedy.
As I did my homework before our 1992
expedition, I couldn’t help comparing
Everest’s history to K2’s. The highest
mountain in the world has its dramatic
stories: Mallory and Irvine disappearing into
the clouds in 1924, Hillary and Tenzing’s
smooth first ascent in 1953, Messner’s
astonishing solo climb without bottled
oxygen in 1980, and the like. But taken as
a whole, the saga of Everest seems to me
a sprawling, even tedious narrative,
especially in recent years, now that guided
commercial expeditions throng the
mountain each spring and fall and as many
as five hundred men and women per
season claim their fifteen minutes each on
the summit.
The history of K2, in contrast, pivots around
a few intense and troubled campaigns,
separated from each other by years of
inactivity or total failure. As I first read
about those campaigns, it struck me that
each one had a lot to tell us about the most
basic questions mountaineering
raises—the questions of risk, ambition,
loyalty to one’s teammates, self-sacrifice,
and the price of glory. As of 2009,
moreover, K2 still has not developed
anything like the guided-client scene on
Everest. The world’s second-highest
mountain is simply too difficult for
beginners.
In focusing on the six most dramatic
seasons in the mountain’s history—August
2008, 1938, 1939, 1953, 1954, and
1986—my aim is not just to tell the stories
of those campaigns, not just to write
chapters of a K2 history, but to muse and
probe my way through those episodes as I
attempt to glean their lessons. This book
might in fact be called “Lessons Learned
from K2.” Plenty of mistakes were made
during those campaigns, leading to
shocking tragedies. But it’s not my intention
to sit back and second-guess my
predecessors. Instead I want to imagine my
way into their company, where I can ponder
the what-might-have-been of their
dilemmas.
Each of those six campaigns evolved into
complicated human predicaments. Faced
with adversity, the members of the 1938
and 1953 expeditions drew together,
forging brotherhoods so deep that they
lasted for decades thereafter. That kind of
brotherhood is not only truly admirable but,
I think, almost unique to mountaineering.
The camaraderie born of shared
adventures was one of the chief things that
drew me to climbing in the first place.
Faced with other kinds of adversity,
however, the 1939 and 1954 teams split
into bitter factions, sparking personal
animosities so intense that some of the
men never spoke to each other again for
the rest of their lives. During the 1986 and
2008 seasons, when many separate teams
thronged K2 (unlike the single expeditions
of ‘38, ‘39, ‘53, and ‘54), any semblance of
order degenerated into a kind of everyman-
for-himself anarchy.
In chapter 2, I retell my own story of K2,
bringing in details and events I either
neglected or forgot to mention in No
Shortcuts. During the four years since I
wrote that other book, I’ve reflected many
times on what went right and what went
wrong on K2 in 1992, and—not
surprisingly—my take on that turning point
in my life has shifted. By reorganizing my
own story in a more straightforward,
chronological narrative, I hope to uncover
stones I’ve never looked under before.
There’s all too much tragedy in K2’s
history. But I hope this book serves as a
hymn of praise to the great mountain. As
well as being dubbed the hardest or the
deadliest mountain in the world, K2 is often
called the most beautiful. It still seems to
me a holy grail—and I am neither the first
nor the last of its many worshippers to
travel to the ends of the earth for the
chance to grasp it in my hands.
A sharp pyramid of black rock, sheer snow
gullies and ridges, and ominous hanging
glaciers, K2 has a symmetry and grace that
make it the most striking of the fourteen
8,000ers. Rising from the Baltoro Glacier in
the heart of the Karakoram, K2 is flanked
by five other of the world’s seventeen
highest peaks. That range, in fact, holds
the densest constellation of skyscraping
mountains anywhere in the world—even
denser than the Himalaya around Everest.
Yet K2 soars in proud isolation over Broad
Peak, Gasherbrum I, Gasherbrum II, and
its other formidable neighbors.
When you approach Mount Everest from
the south, as do all teams that attempt the
classic first-ascent route through the
Khumbu Icefall and up to the South Col, the
great mountain only gradually comes into
view. Most of the way to base camp,
Everest is effectively hidden behind the
bulk of its satellite peak, 25,790-foot
Nuptse. During the multiday trek into base
camp, you get only sporadic peekaboo
glimpses of its summit. As a result, for
climbers the first sight of Everest seldom
comes as a stunning, unforgettable
moment.
It’s just the opposite with K2. As they march
up the Baltoro Glacier, most climbers get
their first view of the mountain from
Concordia, where several glacial streams
converge. All at once, after a week’s trek
from the last village, Askole, K2 springs into
sight. Even though it’s still a dozen miles
away, the sheer, towering presence of the
mountain overwhelms you.
Sir Francis Younghusband, the great
Victorian explorer, was one of the first
Westerners to see K2 from a distance, in
1887. The prospect moved him to an
uncharacteristic effusion in his book about
the expedition; he later recalled “saying
emphatically to myself and to the universe
at large: Oh yes! Oh yes! This really is
splendid! How splendid! How splendid!”
Reinhold Messner, who climbed K2 in
1979, unabashedly called it “the most
beautiful of all the high peaks.” He added:
“An artist has made this mountain.”
In 1992, Scott and I got our first view of K2
not from Concordia but days earlier, when
we hiked up a wooded hill out of our Paiju
camp. All of a sudden, there the mountain
was, sticking up into the sky, a perfect
white pyramid. “Holy shit, that’s big!” said
Scott, and I answered, “Wow, we’re almost
there!” That evening, I wrote in my diary,
“After breakfast, Scott and I scrambled up
the ridges above camp and got some great
views of K2. That is one huge mo-fo!”
By the beginning of the summer of 2008,
some sixty climbers had assembled at base
camp on the south side of K2. Several had
tried the mountain before, but for most of
the men and women on the Baltoro, it was
their first go at K2. After their own first
sightings of the magnificent mountain,
some of their Internet dispatches had
gushed with the same sense of wonder and
astonishment that Scott and I had felt in
1992 and that Younghusband had
expressed way back in 1887. Nearly all of
the climbers were planning to try the
Abruzzi Ridge or its variant spur, the Cesen
route.
Too many days spent sitting out storms at
base camp, however, had taken their toll on
the various teams’ morale. By the end of
July, more than a few of the climbers had
chucked it in and left for home. Others
hovered on a teeter-totter of indecision. A
sixty-one-year-old Frenchman, Hugues
d’Aubarede, decided on July 20 to give up
his attempt. No sooner had he started
packing his gear than several forecasts
arrived predicting a coming spell of
excellent weather. According to journalist
Matthew Power, the Dutch leader of
another team told d’Aubarede, “Just skip
your work for another two or three weeks
and then you can summit K2.” Changing
his mind, d’Aubarede called his wife in
France to tell her he was going to give the
mountain one more shot. It would be a fatal
decision.
The window of clear, windless weather
arrived at the very end of July. In the group
of thirty who set out early on August 1 to go
for the top, there were no superstars. Many
of those climbers, however, had previous
experience on the world’s highest
mountains. A Norwegian couple, for
instance, had climbed Everest together in
2005; they had also reached the north and
the south poles the same year. The Dutch
leader, who had made it to the top of
Everest without bottled oxygen, was on his
third expedition to K2. Besides Norway,
Holland, and France, the mountaineers
came from an assortment of countries,
including Korea, Serbia, Singapore, Italy,
Germany, Spain, Sweden, Australia, the
United Kingdom, and the United States.
There were also several Pakistanis and a
number of Sherpa from Nepal.
Nearly all those climbers set out on August
1 from Camp IV, situated on a broad snow
ridge known as the Shoulder, at about
26,000 feet. The Shoulder is the last place
on the Abruzzi Ridge where you can
reasonably pitch a tent. In 1992, Scott,
Charley, and I placed our own Camp IV as
far along the Shoulder as we could, just
below where the snow slope steepens
toward the start of the Bottleneck couloir.
Last summer’s climbers, however, pitched
their tents on the lower, southern end of the
Shoulder. The difference may not seem like
such a big deal, but we had good reasons
for camping where we did. At altitude, in
soft snow, it can easily take a full hour to
trudge from one end of the Shoulder to the
other. That’s an hour we saved over last
summer’s climbers. That’s an extra hour
added to their grueling summit day on the
way up, and at least twenty minutes on the
way down.
If there was one guy last summer who
really had his act together, it was the
Basque mountaineer Alberto Zerain, who
started his own summit push from well
below the Shoulder, leaving Camp III at
23,600 feet. Operating as a soloist without
teammates, Zerain got moving by 10:00
P.M. on July 31, and he climbed the 2,400
feet up to the Shoulder in the astonishing
time of only two hours. When he reached
the other climbers’ Camp IV, he found them
still struggling to get ready. According to
Freddie Wilkinson, who covered the
tragedy for the magazine Rock and Ice,
“Zerain called out to the others still in their
tents, trying to cajole them into hurrying up
to leave with him. He received few
responses…. After an hour of waiting,
Zerain finally continued alone.”
I must admit that when I first saw photos
from last summer, I was shocked. There
those guys were, still crossing the
Shoulder, and it’s already broad daylight!
As I said, I’m generally not comfortable
criticizing other climbers’ decisions. But that
late start on summit day meant that the
climbers had reduced what was already a
small margin of safety by that much more.
It’s easy to succumb to high-altitude
lassitude. You lose your motivation. It takes
longer not only to do something but even to
think about doing something.
It’s no fun getting off in the middle of the
night from a high camp on an 8,000er.
You’re in this closet-sized tent with your
buddy. It’s dark, it’s cold, there’s ice
everywhere. You have to brew up a
drink—something warm, like a cup of tea.
And that seemingly simple task alone can
consume an hour of precious time. If your
partner has to take a crap, you have to
move aside and let him go out and do that.
Then you have to put on your boots, your
overboots, the rest of your clothes, and
your harness. I always sleep with my boots
in my sleeping bag, though not on my feet.
Lots of climbers don’t. So in the morning
they have to put on cold boots, which will
instantly suck precious warmth from their
feet, whose blood circulation is sorely taxed
to begin with. That contributes to a bad
start.
On my expeditions, I’ve always been the
clock-watcher. I always have a plan. I want
to be in control of the time. In a way, that’s
just part of my nature—I tend to be
punctual. The night before, I’ll remind my
partners, “We need to be out the door by
one or one-thirty A.M.” Other climbers
seem to have the attitude of “Oh, I’ll leave
when I’m ready.” Next thing you know,
they’ve lost two or three hours.
So I have to think that a crucial mistake
made by nearly all the climbers on August
1 was getting off late from Camp IV. That
delay was compounded by what happened
when the first climbers reached the bottom
of the Bottleneck.
As you head up that steep couloir, you’re
excruciatingly aware of the huge ice cliff
hanging over you. It’s a monstrous-looking
thing, some 400 feet high, and the whole
time you’re under it, you can’t help
wondering, What’s holding that damned
serac in place?
In 1992, I nicknamed the ice cliff “the
Motivator.” It certainly motivated Scott,
Charley, and me. It threatens you the whole
time. You don’t want to stop, you can’t take
a break, and as you kick steps up the
couloir, you’re literally holding your breath
while you climb as fast as humanly
possible. Your muscles almost scream from
oxygen deprivation.
The first mountaineer who ever came to
grips with the Motivator was the great Fritz
Wiessner, in 1939. He was so leery of it
that he chose to climb a different route, on
the rock bands well to the left of the
Bottleneck, even though that forced him
onto much more difficult terrain.
Before our 1992 expedition, I’d studied
every photo I could find of that serac. Oddly
enough, the Motivator looked much the
same year after year. It seemed to be
pretty stable. It had a fairly smooth
face—there weren’t big broken chunks that
looked ready to plunge with the first gust of
wind. And in more than fifty years, no one
had ever reported seeing ice calve away
from that face.
Since we had the Bottleneck to ourselves in
‘92, we climbed it as fast as we could. That
was a luxury 2008’s climbers didn’t have.
As soon as the guys in the lead reached
the bottom of the couloir, the whole
procession stalled. The climbers lined up,
one after another, but no one could move
faster than the slowest man. The climb
quickly turned into a traffic jam. On top of
that, matters were made much worse by
the climbers’ common assumption that they
needed fixed ropes to get up and down the
Bottleneck safely.
Afterward, some of the survivors lashed out
at other climbers on the mountain, accusing
them of making mistakes that led directly to
the tragedy. No one was more critical than
Wilco van Rooijen, the forty-year-old
leader of the Dutch Norit K2 expedition.
“Everything was going well to Camp IV,” he
told the press from his hospital bed, “and
on the summit attempt everything went
wrong.” To a reporter from Reuters, van
Rooijen elaborated: “The biggest mistake
we made was that we tried to make
agreements…. Everybody had his own
responsibility and then some people did not
do what they promised. With such stupid
things lives are endangered.”
Since there were so many different teams
on the mountain, their leaders had crafted
the “agreements” to which van Rooijen
referred. The plan was for nine climbers to
string almost 2,000 feet of rope up the
Bottleneck and across the leftward traverse
that leads to easier ground. On August 1,
however, the available supply of rope was
at least 300 feet short—causing the leaders
to doubt whether there was enough to
equip the whole dangerous passage. In
addition, as van Rooijen complained to
Men’s Journal correspondent Matthew
Power, several of the nine lead climbers
“just didn’t show up.”
Then, to make matters worse, the rope
fixers started stringing their lines too low,
on the relatively easy ground before the
Bottleneck really commences. By the time
they got to the most hazardous part of the
climb, they were out of rope. “We were
astonished,” van Rooijen later told the
Associated Press. “We had to move [the
fixed ropes]. That took, of course, many,
many hours. Some turned back because
they didn’t trust it any more.” Speaking to
Power, the Dutchman was even more
scathing: “We lost many, many hours
because of this stupid thing, which we
already talked about many, many times at
Base Camp.”
I’m sorry, but I just don’t buy it. Van Rooijen
claims he couldn’t climb because the ropes
had not been fixed in the right places. Well,
whose fault was that? Does your success
depend on what other people do? Van
Rooijen blames the others for the delay.
Why didn’t he get out and do something?
Meanwhile, the solo Basque climber,
Alberto Zerain, was hours ahead of all the
others. He had cruised up the Bottleneck
and across the traverse without even
thinking about fixed ropes. Zerain would
reach the summit at 3:00 P.M.—the only
climber that day, in my opinion, to top out at
a reasonable hour.
Some 1,600 feet lower on the mountain,
the traffic jam had ground to a halt.
According to Power, “A decision was made
to cut a lower section of the rope and use it
to protect climbers as they made their way
across the traverse [leading leftward from
the top of the Bottleneck]. A knife was
passed down to cut the rope near its
bottom anchor, and the rope was pulled
back up to the head of the line.”
At around 11:00 A.M., the first fatality
occurred. Somewhere in the middle of the
traffic jam, a Serbian climber, Dren Mandic,
unclipped himself from the fixed rope.
Afterward, all kinds of explanations about
what Mandic was attempting to do
appeared in print and on the Internet.
Among other things, he was accused of
trying to leapfrog past other climbers. The
most accurate account was probably that
offered in the public announcement by the
Serbian team, mourning the loss of their
comrade. In broken English, the team
leader reported, “Wishing to replace himself
with climber behind him DREN undo his
assurance. Fix-rope relocated suddenly.
DREN loosed his counterbalance and fell
down to 8020 m [26,300 feet] where his
body was stopped.”
As he fell, Mandic slammed into the next
climber on the fixed rope, Cecilie Skog.
(Skog and her husband, Rolf Bae, were the
experienced Norwegian couple trying to
climb K2 together.) Skog was knocked off
her feet but managed to stay attached to
the fixed rope. According to Wilco van
Rooijen, as reported by Matthew Power,
Still falling, Mandic grabbed wildly at the
rope, jerking two other climbers off their
feet. He then lost his grip and tumbled
down the steep couloir, pinwheeling
hundreds of feet back down toward the
Shoulder. “Just one moment, and he was
gone,” says Wilco.
Uncertain whether their teammate was still
alive, two Serbians and a Pakistani porter
descended to his body. By the time they
got there, Mandic was dead. According to
Power, however, over the radio from base
camp, the Serbian team leader ordered that
trio to try to haul the body back to Camp IV.
As they began the effort, the porter, Jehan
Baig—described by Power as
“inexperienced”—suddenly slipped and fell.
Eyewitnesses claimed that Baig never tried
to self-arrest with his ice ax. Instead, he
cartwheeled down the slope and plunged
out of sight over a cornice.
If Power is correct in his assertion that the
body recovery was ordered by the team
leader, that directive strikes me as
questionable at best. It’s hard enough to
help a sick or wounded climber descend
under his own power from 26,000 feet on
an 8,000er; it’s virtually impossible to haul a
dead body from such a perilous perch back
to camp. It’s not clear what the ultimate
point of that mission would have been,
since the body could never have been
taken all the way down the mountain. That
order, if in fact it was given, cost Jehan
Baig his life. It’s curious that in his public
announcement, the Serbian team leader
made no mention of Baig’s death. Instead,
he wrote, “We muffled our friend’s body in
the Serbian flag, secured it with pickaxe
and put it on 7,900 m [25,900 feet] to the
right from direction C4-Bottleneck. Our
friend rest near the heaven. Let God bless
him.”
It’s also unclear how many of the climbers
stuck in the traffic jam were even aware
that Mandic had fallen to his death. Almost
certainly, none of them knew about the
second fatal accident down below. In any
event, now that the rope salvaged from the
bottom of the Bottleneck had been fixed in
place on the culminating traverse (the
hardest part of the whole route), most of
the climbers in the traffic jam kept plodding,
ever so slowly, upward.
One of the few in the crowd who had
decided to turn around and give up his
summit attempt, the American Chris Klinke
took an amazing photo of the upper
mountain from Camp IV just after noon on
August 1. (The shot, which captures in a
single image the fiasco that was unfolding
on K2 that day, was run splashed across a
two-page spread in Men’s Journal.) The
picture is so sharp that you can clearly see
twenty-two tiny, insectlike human figures on
the route. At the bottom of the photo, well
below the Bottleneck, two of them are
engaged in the effort to recover Mandic’s
body, only minutes before Baig would fall to
his death. Most of the climbers have finally
escaped the Bottleneck and the traverse,
but the traffic jam is alive and well: nineteen
of the climbers are so tightly bunched that it
looks as though each one is on the verge of
stepping on the heels of the climber in front
of him. Far, far above even the leader of
the traffic jam, a solitary climber—Alberto
Zerain—rests in the lee of a small serac
before starting on to the summit.
In my view, many of those climbers still
heading upward ought to have thought a
little more seriously about turning back.
Turnaround times aren’t an ironclad rule on
K2, but I believe in them for myself. On our
own summit day, Scott and I got moving
from Camp IV at 1:30 A.M. Charley, who
started a little later, caught up with us,
having followed the tracks we’d kicked in
the deep snow. I had resolved that if we
didn’t summit by 2:00 P.M., I’d turn around.
As it was, we topped out at noon.
In August 2008, I suspect, summit fever
took over in the traffic jam. All those
climbers were piled together. They were
slow together, and they were late together,
and that probably rationalized their decision
to continue toward the summit together, so
late that the sun would be setting as they
topped out. Only a few of them thought
better of it and turned around. On a
mountain like K2, nobody gives you credit
for making the smart decision to give up the
summit and go down.
In 1990, an acquaintance of mine, Greg
Child, an outstanding Aussie mountaineer
transplanted to the United States, climbed
K2 by its north ridge, a considerably harder
route than the Abruzzi. Recently I reread
Greg’s account of the climb, published as
“A Margin of Luck” in his collection of
essays Mixed Emotions. Greg has a
sardonic, even self-mocking style, so some
of the things he writes in that piece may be
tongue-in-cheek. Even so, it’s clear that he
had a desperate time on summit day.
At 27,500 feet, only 750 feet below the top,
Greg and his partners Greg Mortimer and
Steve Swenson discussed what to do. It
was already past 4:00 P.M.
Swenson looks down: “Should we go for
it?” A long pause follows. Nothing could be
more uncertain.
“Yes!” Mortimer finally shouts, prodding us
into action and out of this inertia of doubt.
“This is crazy,” I think to myself. “A storm is
moving in and we’re going for the summit,
without oxygen, without bivouac gear.” But,
I rationalize, this is our last shot at the
mountain. If we go down now, we’ll never
climb K2. A little more luck is all we need.
That exchange is incredibly similar to the
one I had in 1992 with Scott and Charley as
heavy snow began to fall. We, too, were
above 27,000 feet. I remember asking,
“Hey, what do you guys think?” “Whaddya
mean?” Scott answered, and Charlie
chimed in, “We’re going up!”
In 1990, Greg Child reached the summit
only at 8:05 P.M. He didn’t start down until
9:00. That descent in the
dark—”staggering, falling in the
snow”—turned into what climbers
mordantly call “an all-out epic.” Greg
started to have hallucinations. Finding an
empty oxygen cylinder in a circle of rocks,
he fantasized:
I’m seeing an image in my mind of me
hunkered among the rocks, warming my
hands over a campfire. “That’s right,” I
think, “I’ll build a fire down there. When
Mortimer arrives we’ll get nice and warm.”
I’ve got it all worked out.
Only 300 feet short of the tent, Greg
became “completely apathetic” and
collapsed. He literally crawled the last
stretch to safety.
Man, I thought, as I reread Greg’s essay,
that was scary, to go that long and that late
. I wouldn’t have done that. Greg’s a really
strong climber. A weaker mountaineer
wouldn’t have survived.
Messner himself is famous for having wild
hallucinations on the 8,000ers, especially
when he was climbing alone. But I’ve
always felt that if I started to hallucinate, I
was doing something wrong.
The fourth member of Greg’s team in 1990,
Phil Ershler, did turn back. And Ershler, as
a senior guide at Rainier Mountaineering,
Inc. (RMI), had been one of my most
important mentors. On our own summit day
in 1992, as I carried that knot in my gut and
couldn’t make up my mind whether to go up
or down, I kept thinking, Well, Ershler
turned around.
As he headed down from the summit in
August 2008, Alberto Zerain passed no
fewer than eighteen climbers still going for
the top. According to Men’s Journal:
Though he doesn’t speak English, [Zerain]
claims he tried to tell the others that it was
getting too late to continue. “As I
descended,” he explains, “everyone
stopped to ask me how far it was to the
summit. Did I tell the people to turn
around? No, you can’t. There are a lot of
people, and they are all going up together.
It’s the majority against you.”
(There’s a succinct definition of summit
fever!)
Some of the climbers that day may well
have pondered turning around. But one of
the more experienced, the Italian Marco
Confortola, tried to rally them onward. “I
started shouting,” he later told reporters. “I
told them that the first person to reach the
summit of K2 [in 1954] did it at 6:00 P.M.,
so let’s move!”
At least one climber in the throng, the
Norwegian Rolf Bae, stopped below the
top. Only 300 vertical feet short of the
prized goal, Bae waited for his wife, Cecilie
Skog, and another teammate to tag the
summit and return.
Besides Zerain, seventeen others reached
the top. Their arrival times ranged from
5:20 P.M. to after 7:00 P.M. For some, this
meant that they had been going for twenty
hours since leaving camp that morning.
They were already pretty worn out.
By the time those summiteers got back to
the diagonal snow ramp that leads down to
the tricky traverse and the Bottleneck, it
was pitch-dark. And most of them were
exhausted.
It’s at this point that it’s hard to figure out
just what happened on K2 late on August 1.
The various accounts that filtered back
from the survivors are so mutually
contradictory, you can’t stitch them together
into a coherent narrative. It seems that the
strongest climbers hoped to down-climb in
the night all the way to Camp IV. But
others, upon realizing how late they would
arrive on the summit, apparently planned to
bivouac well above the crux traverse and
the Bottleneck.
By “planned to bivouac,” I don’t mean to
suggest that this was part of their
preconceived agenda. As far as I can tell,
none of them carried a bivouac sack, or a
half sleeping bag, or even a stove, and by
now nearly all of them were without food
and water. It may be that they had become
so wasted that there seemed no alternative
to bivouacking. But one thing is clear:
whether that night or the next morning, they
were counting on the fixed ropes to get
down through the Bottleneck to Camp IV.
The weather was still perfect. But to survive
a night in the open above 27,000 feet
without shelter, food, or water, you have to
hang your life out on a limb. Yet it’s
amazing how many climbers on K2 seem to
take for granted the option of bivouacking
on the way down as the price to pay for
bagging the summit. On our own 1992
expedtion, the ostensible leader of our
team, Vladimir Balyberdin, bivouacked
above 27,000 feet. Vlad was a tough dude,
he had a mild night, and he got away with
it. The next night, Chantal Mauduit thought
she had no choice but to bivouac at 27,500
feet, but Aleksei Nikiforov, coming down
from the top three hours later, roused her
out of her apathy and cajoled her into
descending with him—probably saving her
life.
In 1978, my friend Jim Wickwire was one of
the four climbers who became the first
Americans to climb K2. Jim and his partner,
Lou Reichardt, got to the top at 5:15 P.M.
Lou realized the importance of heading
down at once, and took off after only a few
minutes. But Jim lingered, almost in a
trance, taking photographs, changing the
film in his camera, and savoring that
indescribable achievement, until he had
spent close to an hour on the summit. It’s
uncannily similar to what happened on
Annapurna on the first ascent in 1950:
Louis Lachenal was obsessed with getting
back to camp, while Maurice Herzog, the
team leader, stayed and stayed, caught up
in a euphoric vision that would ultimately
cost him his toes and fingers.
On K2, Lou made it down to high camp that
night, but Jim had to bivouac just below
28,000 feet. He barely survived; by the time
he reached base camp, he was suffering
from both pneumonia and pleurisy, his
vocal cords were paralyzed, and he had
incurred some frostbite. He was absolutely
wrecked. Porters had to carry him in a litter
back to Concordia, and he was eventually
helicoptered off the Baltoro.
There’s an old joke: “bivouac” is a French
word for “mistake.” I’m proud of the fact that
on all thirty of my expeditions to 8,000-
meter peaks, I never once had to bivouac.
On several occasions, I turned around
short of the summit rather than submit to a
night out without shelter. In 1990, if Greg
Child, Greg Mortimer, and Steve Swenson
had bivouacked instead of calling upon
their utmost reserves to get back to camp,
they might well have died on the north
ridge.
After Zerain and several of the Sherpa, the
strongest climbers that day were probably
the Norwegian trio: Cecilie Skog; her
husband, Rolf Bae; and their teammate
Lars Nessa. At dusk, ahead of all the
others, they climbed down the ramp and
clipped in to the last fixed rope on the near
end of the traverse to the Bottleneck.
It was at this precise moment, sometime
between 8:00 P.M. and 9:00 P.M., that the
geologic fluke that would transform the
gathering fiasco into a true catastrophe
occurred. As Freddie Wilkinson
reconstructed the event in Rock and Ice:
Bae [was] in the lead. Skog traversed next
and heard the sickening roar of a large
avalanche in the darkness. A second later,
Skog was wrenched off balance as the
rope she was clipped to broke somewhere
below. Bae’s headlamp disappeared.
Skog called out in the black night for her
husband, but got no response.
A huge section of the Motivator, that
ferocious but apparently stable ice cliff
hanging over the route, had collapsed at
the worst possible moment.
Despite the unfathomable shock of having
her husband crushed by tons of ice as he
traversed just ahead of her, then hearing
his body plunge and vanish with the falling
debris, Skog kept her wits about her. She
carried a thin 165-foot rope in her pack.
Now she and Nessa tied that cord to the
broken end of a dangling fixed rope and
rappelled into the Bottleneck. They
downclimbed the couloir in the dark and
made their way back to Camp IV in the
early morning hours.
When the first bulletins from K2 hit the
newspapers and the Internet, the initial
scenario made it sound as though the
collapsing ice cliff had wiped out most of
the climbers who had died on the mountain.
But Bae was apparently the sole direct
victim of the crashing ice blocks. Far more
consequential was the fact that the debris
took with it a sizable section of fixed
ropes—estimates by the climbers
themselves ranged from 600 to 1,500 feet.
And this unforeseen event effectively
stranded all the climbers above the
Norwegians in a cul-de-sac that was,
paradoxically, of their own making.
By the time Rolf Bae was killed, several of
the other climbers had already decided to
bivouac. The Dutch leader, Wilco van
Rooijen, later reported that he never saw
the serac collapse, and didn’t know until
much later that it had. At something like
27,200 feet, van Rooijen carved out a seat
in the snow slope and settled into it as he
anticipated a grim night with neither
sleeping bag nor food nor water. Beside
him, two other members of the Dutch Norit
team prepared their own bivouac seats.
They were the Italian, thirty-seven-year-old
Marco Confortola, and a thirty-seven-yearold
Irishman, Gerard McDonnell. A funloving
folk musician and oil worker,
McDonnell was especially well liked by his
teammates. A few days earlier, he had left
a farewell note on his online blog upon
leaving base camp, a phrase in Gaelic that
translates as “That’s all for now, friends.
The time is coming.” On reaching the top
late on August 1, McDonnell phoned his
girlfriend in Alaska. He had become the first
Irishman to climb K2.
From a hospital in Islamabad, Confortola
recounted his bivouac to a reporter from
the British newspaper the Independent.
“Since Gerard was having a difficult time,”
the Italian said, “I made his hole bigger to
help him lie down for a little bit. Gerard was
very cold. I was also cold and began to
shiver on purpose to create heat. I was
wasting energy, but I needed to get warm.”
The bivouac ledge was perilously exposed.
“I made sure not to fall asleep,” Confortola
added, “because I could have fallen [off the
mountain].”
The three men managed to get through the
night, then started down in the morning.
Somewhere they came across three
Korean climbers, tangled up in a single
rope with which they were tied together.
“There was a Korean guy hanging upside
down,” van Rooijen recalled. “There was a
second Korean guy who held him with a
rope but he was also in shock and then a
third guy was there also, and they were
trying to survive but I had also to survive.”
Van Rooijen said that the Koreans declined
his offer of help. But Confortola insisted
that he and McDonnell spent three hours
trying to disentangle the Koreans from their
snarled rope and get them started down, to
no avail.
At this point, even Confortola’s several
accounts of what happened didn’t quite
jibe. To the Independent reporter, he
claimed that “for some strange reason,”
McDonnell started “to walk away.” To
others, he reported (in Matthew Power’s
paraphrase), “Suddenly … Gerard turned
around and began to climb back up the
slope, back toward the Koreans, offering no
explanation.” McDonnell’s friends later
concluded that he went back up in a final
attempt to give aid to the Koreans.
I’m not surprised at these discrepancies. By
the time Confortola finally reached base
camp, he was so wiped out that his
memory could well have been playing tricks
on him. And all climbers accept the sad fact
that nonclimbing journalists can never
seem to get our stories right. We have all
had the experience of thinking that we
explained very lucidly to some reporter just
what happened on some mountain, only to
have a completely garbled version appear
in print.
In any event, at this point, while he was still
in the Bottleneck couloir, Confortola fell
asleep from sheer exhaustion. He awoke to
a loud booming noise. He later told the
website K2Climb.net, “I saw my friend
Gerard’s boots falling among the blocks of
ice and snow. That was the worst moment.”
Apparently, a second, smaller serac
collapse—a kind of aftershock of the
massive initial breakdown of the night
before—had engulfed McDonnell and
carried him to his death. Later, the grieving
Italian remembered his friend: “I used to
call him Jesus. The beard, everything, he
looked like Christ. He was always smiling.
He was a flower.”
By now, chaos reigned among the climbers
still trying to negotiate the descent. Van
Rooijen bitterly recaptured the scene:
“People were running down but didn’t know
where to go, so a lot of people were lost on
the mountain on the wrong side, wrong
route. They were thinking of using my gas
[bottled oxygen], my rope. So actually
everybody was fighting for himself and I still
do not understand why everybody were
[sic] leaving each other.”
Had the climbers been members of a single
unified team—like the Americans on K2 in
1953, for example—they might have rallied
to one another’s aid. But given how many
different teams were on the mountain in
2008, with only whatever rudimentary
English each one commanded as a
common language, it is not surprising that
anarchy prevailed.
By this point, van Rooijen and Confortola
had separated. Their solo descents took on
the nightmarish quality of last-ditch retreats.
And both men became effectively lost. Van
Rooijen later told National Geographic
Adventure,
The next morning after I spent the night, it
was difficult to come down. I had radio
contact with my climbing partners in Camp
IV, but … [I] didn’t find Camp IV. I was on
the wrong side of the mountain. People at
base camp saw me go over the wrong side
of the ridge…. I had to sit out a whiteout
because I couldn’t see anything and I knew
I couldn’t go down any further. So I waited.
And to his brother over a satellite phone
from Pakistan, Confortola recalled, “During
the descent … due to the altitude and the
exhaustion, I even fell asleep in the snow,
and when I woke up I could not figure out
where I was.”
Even without a sleepless night in a bivouac,
it’s easy enough to get lost descending a
mountain like K2. Coming down from the
summit in ‘92, Scott started to veer off in
the wrong direction, too far east. If I hadn’t
corrected him, he might have led us
completely off the Abruzzi Ridge, into
uncharted terrain on the east face.
On the way up, a lot of climbers gaze
ahead; they never look down at the way
they came. But at some point in the
descent, they start wondering, “Now, where
was it that I came up this thing?” I’ve
always made it a fundamental principle to
keep looking down on the way up, to
memorize the landmarks that will guide my
descent. It’s partly instinct, and it’s partly
my training as an RMI guide. On Rainier,
on Denali, that was hammered home as a
crucial thing to do.
The chaos on the morning of August 2 was
so total that we don’t even know what
happened to some of the climbers who
died. One of them was the sixty-one-yearold
Frenchman, Hugues d’Aubarede, the
guy who almost pulled up stakes and went
home, before van Rooijen talked him into
giving the mountain a last shot. On the
summit, d’Aubarede radioed his final
message home: “It’s minus twenty [degrees
Celsius], I’m at 8,811 [meters]. I’m too cold,
I’m too happy. Thank you.”
Somewhere on the descent, d’Aubarede
simply vanished. In all likelihood, he fell off
the mountain as he tried to downclimb. Like
those of many K2 victims over the decades,
his body may never be found.
By the time the disaster had run its course,
eleven climbers had died in a single thirtysix-
hour period on K2. Besides the Serb
Dren Mandic, the Pakistani porter Jehan
Baig, the three Koreans, Rolf Bae, Gerard
McDonnell, and Hugues d’Aubarede, the
victims included another Pakistani porter
who was climbing with the Frenchman, and
two veteran Sherpa.
To be sure, a lot of mistakes were made on
K2 in August 2008. Too late a start by too
many climbers from Camp IV; too many
people on the route at the same time,
climbing too slowly, which created the
traffic jam; the further delay when the team
leaders insisted that the fixed ropes in the
Bottleneck had to be repositioned; summit
fever, which kept so many from turning
back short of the summit; too late an hour
when all but Zerain topped out; the panic
that set in after the serac collapse in the
night.
The initial media coverage, however, made
it sound as though the collapse of the
Motivator was the direct and sole cause of
the tragedy, almost like an act of God. But
except for Rolf Bae, people didn’t die
because of the serac collapse. They died
because of what that serac collapse
created, after all the other ominous
conditions surrounding the ascent had
come into play.
It’s very much like what happened on
Everest in 1996. The “killer storm” of May
10–11 wasn’t the single direct cause of the
tragedy. It was simply the straw that broke
the camel’s back. That camel had already
been overloaded by climbers starting too
late, going too slowly, refusing to turn
around, and using up their reserves of
energy and bottled oxygen.
Even so, I was shocked by the viciousness
of the public response to 2008’s tragedy.
All kinds of nonclimbers riveted by the
news from K2 seemed to derive a kind of
spiteful glee from the terrible events. After
the New York Times ran its front-page story
about the disaster, scores of folks weighed
in online. Something like 90 percent of their
comments were derogatory I-told-you-sos.
The Times article said nothing about
“heroes,” yet carpers made such comments
as “It’s long past time to stop calling these
egomaniacs heroes and call them what
they are. Selfish, egomaniacs, and stupid.”
Another reader wrote in, “Heroes my ass.
No one should feel an inch of sympathy for
these egg heads.” Yet another proclaimed,
“They engaged in marginally suicidal
behavior and wound up dead. To me, they
were stupid and reckless beyond all limits.”
It was as if mountaineering itself were
considered by the public—or at least by a
significant sector of the public—to be
nothing more than a selfish, idiotic form of
Russian roulette. It was also assumed that
the climbers on K2 were fat-cat millionaires.
Wrote another Times respondent,
“Because someone is rich enough to travel
to the end of the Earth to play chicken with
suicide does not make him a hero.”
Call this the Krakauer effect, though you
can’t blame it on Jon Krakauer. Since I was
involved in the ‘96 Everest catastrophe,
when our IMAX team temporarily gave up
our own summit plans to try to rescue
climbers in trouble, I had a front-row seat
as the tragedy unfolded. At the time, I was
critical of some of the decisions made by
both clients and guides that May, and I still
feel they made fatal mistakes. But I can’t
imagine sitting in some armchair back
home and rejoicing that these “clueless
dilettantes” got what they were asking for.
Sadly, a major vein in the public response
to Into Thin Air ran along just those lines.
But there’s no viable analogy between
Everest in 1996 and K2 in 2008. Not a
single one of the eleven climbers who died
that August on the world’s second-highest
mountain was a true client in the sense that
Scott Fischer’s Mountain Madness or Rob
Hall’s Adventure Consultants customers
were. None of them were paying big bucks
to have a commercial guiding company get
them up the mountain. They were almost
uniformly experienced climbers in their own
right. The Pakistani porters may have
helped the Europeans carry loads and
establish camps, but they were not acting
as true guides. And the Sherpa on K2 were
not hired hands but climbers going for the
top themselves, on an equal footing with
their Western counterparts.
Yet in one respect, 2008’s mountaineers
allowed themselves to slip closer to the
status of clients than nearly anyone had on
previous K2 campaigns. This had to do with
their dependence on fixed ropes. In the
aftermath of the tragedy, too much focus
has been put on the collapse of the serac,
too little on the whole business of the fixed
ropes.
In general in the mountains, it’s harder to
climb down a pitch than to climb up it. And
if you’ve relied on fixed ropes to get
yourself up the Bottleneck and across the
traverse—just “jugging” along, with your
ascender clipped to the line—it can be
terrifying to face having to descend those
same passages without fixed ropes.
Especially in the dark, after you’re really
strung out from taking so long to get to the
summit.
In 1992, Scott, Charley, and I had no fixed
ropes to help us get up and down the
Bottleneck. We climbed the couloir; then,
on the descent, despite the dangerous
accumulation of new snow, we simply
faced in, kicked in our crampons, planted
our ice tools, and climbed down that steep,
600-foot slope. Even Jim Wickwire in 1978,
though near death after his bivouac,
summoned the nerve and the technique to
climb down the traverse and the Bottleneck
unaided by fixed ropes or partners.
No one even thought of fixing ropes all the
way through the Bottleneck until about two
years ago. How quickly, though, the
comfort of fixed ropes gets taken for
granted. It even starts to seem to some
climbers like a privilege that ought to come
with the K2 package, as reflected in Wilco
van Rooijen’s petulant complaint that some
of the designated fixers didn’t “show up”
and that other climbers placed the ropes in
“the wrong places.”
If you’re counting on fixed ropes to get you
over all the hard places, you’re much less
likely to carry your own rope, much less
any pitons or ice screws. Cecilie Skog and
Lars Nessa may have survived because
Skog carried her own thin rope, with which
the two of them improvised a rappel over
the most difficult passage. It doesn’t seem
as though any of the other “stranded”
climbers even thought about
rappelling—probably because they didn’t
carry their own ropes and hardware. It’s
easy to imagine this scenario, since
carrying extra gear for those “just in case”
situations is not a priority anymore, while
trimming weight and traveling light is. The
three Koreans were found tangled up in
their climbing rope. Why didn’t they untie
and try to rappel with it? Perhaps they were
simply too exhausted, too befuddled by
hypoxia, their fingers too stiff with cold to
manage the operation. We’ll never know.
After the tragedy, a member of the Dutch
Norit team, Cas van de Gevel, who
reached the summit and downclimbed
successfully, was quoted in Outside
magazine as saying, “On the mountain
there were no heroes.”
Instead, there was full-blown chaos, the
every-man-for-himself panic that van
Rooijen later so vividly described. The chief
reason for that, I believe, is that there was
nothing like a unified band of mountaineers
on K2. Instead, there were ten different
teams with climbers from fifteen different
countries. Most of them didn’t know each
other beforehand, and at base camp they
didn’t form lasting friendships beyond the
boundaries of their own teams.
But there was also something relatively
new going on that summer, something that
has already played itself out with a
vengeance on Everest in recent years. It’s
a kind of dehumanization, and if it’s
inevitably the wave of the future, as I think
it may be, well, that says something sad
about mountaineering. It involves a
scenario in which one climber comes
across another climber who’s in a truly
desperate situation. And it’s as if the
climber who’s not in trouble says to himself,
I don’t know you. You’re not my problem.
And so he leaves the victim to die—or at
least to get himself out of his own
predicament.
I just don’t understand that way of thinking.
Six times on 8,000ers, I’ve given up my
own plans to try to help save the lives of
others. Sometimes they were partners and
good friends, such as Dave Carter on
Everest, J.-C. Lafaille on Broad Peak, and
Jimmy Chin on Cho Oyu. But others—like
Beck Weathers on Everest and Gary Ball
and Chantal Mauduit on K2—were
strangers to me before we met at base
camp. I can’t really say what other people
should have done in comparable
predicaments; I just know what seemed
instinctively to me to be the right thing to
do. I couldn’t live with myself if I’d just
walked past someone in bad trouble and
left him to save himself.
Van de Gevel was wrong, however. Last
summer, there were heroes on K2. As
seems increasingly to be the case on the
world’s tallest mountains, they happened to
be Sherpa.
From Camp IV, on the afternoon of August
2, several climbers could see the three
Koreans at about 27,000 feet, above the
traverse and the Bottleneck. They were still
moving feebly, though making no
downward progress. With them was a
Sherpa, Jumic Bhote, who had also
summited, and who may have been
effectively guiding the Koreans. In Camp IV
were Tsering Bhote and Pasang Bhote,
Jumic’s brother and cousin, respectively.
These two Sherpa performed an incredible
feat. They climbed the Bottleneck and the
traverse—without fixed ropes, of course. In
the lead, Pasang reached the three
Koreans, who were almost unconscious,
and Jumic. Pasang managed to revive two
of the Koreans and his cousin and get them
started down the mountain again.
Just as the four climbers reached the top of
the Bottleneck, according to Freddie
Wilkinson, who reconstructed what
happened for Rock and Ice, another huge
chunk of the Motivator cut loose. It scoured
the Bottleneck, sweeping the two Koreans
and the two Sherpa with it. As Tsering
Bhote watched in horror, all four men
plunged to their deaths. Deeply shaken,
Tsering managed to descend safely to
Camp IV.
Meanwhile, the media were focused on the
survival stories of Marco Confortola and
Wilco van Rooijen, reporters hanging on
every word the Italian and the Dutchman
uttered from their hospital beds in
Islamabad. Thus this last and most deadly
episode of the tragedy, which concealed
the genuine heroism of Pasang Bhote and
Tsering Bhote, nearly passed beneath the
radar.
Sherpa heroism did not end there. Along
with Alberto Zerain, the two most
competent and experienced climbers on K2
that summer were thirty-four-year-old
Chhiring Dorje and thirty-four-year-old
Pemba Gyalje. Chhiring had climbed
Everest ten times, Pemba six. In the early
morning hours of August 1, Pemba had
been one of the lead climbers fixing rope
up the Bottleneck. Far stronger than the
Europeans, he could have left them behind
and gone for the top on his own. But on the
summit, he waited until the last European
topped out, just to make sure everyone was
all right, and only then descended with the
stragglers.
Pemba did this not because he was a
“hired gun,” which he was not, but just, I
suspect, because he was a Sherpa. The
best Sherpa have far more endurance at
the end of a long summit day. Westerners
tend to think, Boy, that was hard. I’m
exhausted. Sherpa think, Well, yes, it’s
hard, but that’s what it is.
They’ve worked hard every day since they
were kids. They’re used to carrying heavy
loads from village to village. Their whole
lives are about hardship and struggle.
When climbers such as McDonnell, van
Rooijen, and Confortola chose to bivouac,
both Chhiring and Pemba decided to climb
down toward Camp IV in the dark. Near the
top of the Bottleneck, Chhiring ran into
another Sherpa, Pasang Lama, who had
also reached the summit, but who by now
had dropped his ax. If anyone was truly
stranded on the mountain, it was Pasang.
“Pasang Lama was worried, but I said don’t
worry,” Chhiring later e-mailed Freddie
Wilkinson. “We have only two options—one
is staying here, which is very dangerous
under the serac. The other option is to
descend down with one ice ax, which may
lead us to Camp IV …if we don’t slip.”
So Chhiring cut off a short hank of broken
fixed rope, tied Pasang to him in a tight
tether, then, facing in, used his ax and his
crampons to descend the Bottleneck, with
his fellow Sherpa almost dangling from his
harness like a haul bag. The two eventually
reached Camp IV without mishap.
That’s a pretty astounding deed. But I can
just imagine how you might pull it off: kick
each foot in solid, plant the ax, then tell the
other guy to kick with his own feet and even
punch holds with his hands. Don’t move
until he’s secure. Still, if Pasang had come
off, he probably would have taken Chhiring
with him. Talk about selfless!
It’s a Sherpa thing. They’re loyal. It’s their
ethos, instilled in them on Everest. They
just feel it’s the right thing to do.
But if Chhiring and Pasang could make it
down with one ice ax between them, one
guy short-roped like a dead weight to the
other, why couldn’t those Europeans have
downclimbed the Bottleneck
unencumbered?
Pemba Gyalje reached Camp IV by 1:00
A.M. on August 2. In the morning, on
learning that a bunch of climbers were still
unaccounted for, he simply headed back up
the mountain. To do that, after an
exhausting summit day of your own—and
both Chhiring and Pemba had summited
without supplemental oxygen, the first
Sherpa to do so on K2—takes incredible
fortitude. And, once again, incredible
selflessness.
Pemba reached Marco Confortola halfway
up the Bottleneck. The Italian was
unconscious and probably suffering from
severe altitude sickness. With bottled
oxygen, Pemba got Confortola going again.
But almost as soon as the two men had
started down, the third serac collapse—the
one that carried the two Koreans and
Pasang Bhote and Jumic Bhote to their
deaths—nearly took out Confortola and
Pemba. The Italian was struck in the back
of the head by a chunk of falling ice. He
started to fall, but Pemba grabbed him from
behind and held him. The Sherpa then
shepherded the Italian the rest of the way
down to Camp IV. There is no doubt that
Confortola would have died had Pemba not
rescued him.
This time, as he collapsed in his tent,
Pemba was truly worn out. But the next
morning, when he learned that Wilco van
Rooijen was still missing, he went out
again.
Van Rooijen had gotten wildly off route as
he made his impulsive and desperate
descent. He had wandered to the west not
only of the Abruzzi Ridge but of its western
variant, the Cesen route, by which the
Dutch team had ascended. He may have
glancingly intersected the prominent snow
ridge called “the Shoulder,” but he missed
Camp IV altogether. After a second night
out, van Rooijen was truly lost—and near
death.
Bizarrely enough, the ring of the
Dutchman’s sat phone in the darkness
gave his team the first inkling of his
whereabouts. On August 3, Pemba and
Cas van de Gevel found van Rooijen. They
led him slowly back to Camp III, which the
three men reached only well after dark.
In his interviews with reporters, van Rooijen
made scant mention of Pemba’s rescue.
Recounting his epic to National Geographic
Adventure, the Dutchman credited instead
his own skills: “My mountaineering
experience let me be quiet and patient
enough to wait for better weather…. I took
a risk climbing some difficult technical parts
to traverse to easier slopes and to easier
glaciers. I finally survived.”
This is a sad trend in recent
mountaineering on the 8,000ers. When
something screws up, the Sherpa are the
first ones to be blamed. But when a Sherpa
performs heroically, as Pemba did in saving
the only two climbers who bivouacked
above the Motivator and then got off the
mountain alive, they barely get credited,
and often they are not even named.
I was very gratified, then, when Pemba
Gyalje was hailed by National Geographic
Adventure in December 2008 as its
Adventurer of the Year, an award I had won
in 2005. The National Geographic Society,
or NGS, flew Pemba to Washington, D.C.,
for the ceremony, and I heard that he really
enjoyed it, as he stood beaming and
holding aloft his trophy, while the audience
in the posh society headquarters gave him
a wild standing ovation.
Topping off the encomiums, the American
Alpine Club bestowed its most prestigious
honor, the David A. Sowles Memorial
Award (for heroism in saving the lives of
other climbers), on Pemba at its annual
meeting in Golden, Colorado, in February
2009.
People often ask me if a disaster like last
summer’s is bound to happen again on K2.
And my answer, sadly, is yes. Too many of
the climbers who survive such a fiasco tell
themselves, Well, I got away with it. And
too many others, planning their own future
expeditions, think, Oh, it’s not going to
happen to me.
The most those of us who have climbed the
world’s highest mountains can hope to do
is educate others. I also tried to educate
myself every step of the way on all of my
climbs, realizing I could never learn
enough. But sometimes I wonder if even
trying to educate others is a lost cause.
Little that we say or do seems to sink in.
The appeal of risk seems to outweigh the
rewards of discipline on hazardous peaks.
To cite an oft-quoted statistic, after the
1996 season, when so many inexperienced
clients came to grief on Everest, in 1997
the numbers of applicants willing to pay as
much as $75,000 apiece to get guided up
the highest mountain significantly
increased.
After No Shortcuts to the Top was
published in 2006, I got hundreds of letters
and e-mails from readers. Very few of them
were negative or critical, and many folks
wrote to say that they were captivated or
even inspired by my story. But the e-mail
that probably moved me the most—the one
that almost stunned me, it came so out of
the blue—didn’t arrive until December
2008. That e-mail alone helped reaffirm for
me that it was worth writing and talking
about the risks and rewards of our glorious
but dangerous pastime—that some good
may yet come out of sharing with others
what the mountains have taught me.
The e-mail was from Chris Klinke, the
American on K2 in 2008 who, dismayed by
the traffic jam on August 1, turned back.
Klinke and I had never met, but he wrote:
Hi Ed,
I wanted to thank you for something that
you are not even aware of at this point. But
as I was making my decision to turn around
just below the Bottleneck I kept
remembering a discussion that I had with
my teammates at BC….
The thing that helped me make the
decision was the discussion we had about
your feeling of regret about your summit on
K2 because you violated your own personal
rules of listening to your gut….
In remembering that conversation with my
teammates and your description of that
feeling in your book I made the decision to
turn around. Despite the fact that there
were 24 people heading to the summit,
despite the fact that the weather was
amazingly perfect, I felt my gut telling me
something entirely different.
Listening to that feeling was a good
decision for myself, and I appreciate the
fact that I had the ability to get guidance
from those on the mountain and those who
came before me.
I hope to meet you in the future and I thank
you for blazing the trail on so many
mountains.
Be Well,Chris Klinke
2
DECISION
In 2007, after another controversial spring
season on Mount Everest—record numbers
reached the summit, but seven climbers
died—I was asked by the New York Times
to write an op-ed piece. The editor’s only
half-articulated premise was What can we
do about this mess? As we talked and emailed
back and forth, I began to realize
that what she really wanted from me was a
rigid set of rules and restrictions that
somehow could immediately be put into
action. When I told her that I thought you
couldn’t make rules about mountaineering,
she quickly lost interest in my writing a
piece.
All kinds of commentators shared the
Times editor’s sentiments in the wake of
2008’s K2 disaster. There was also a
widespread determination to pinpoint the
supposed “villains” of the story. If we could
only identify the cause of the tragedy, these
armchair judges implied, we could fix it so it
wouldn’t happen again.
I’m afraid I just don’t see things that way.
About arriving on the summit as late as
7:00 P.M., for instance, I have no trouble
saying that I’d never do that. But that
doesn’t mean that I can tell other climbers
what to do. In mountaineering, right and
wrong aren’t black-and-white. For every
“rule” you might try to apply to our pastime,
you can come up with a classic example of
some daring alpinist who flagrantly violated
it, and in the process became a legend. In
1953 on Nanga Parbat, according to the
wisdom of the day, the Austrian climber
Hermann Buhl should never have gone for
the summit alone. He should have turned
around rather than reach the top as late as
7:00 P.M. Above all, he should not have let
himself get so strung out that he would
have to bivouac on a ledge so tiny he
couldn’t even sit down on it. But Buhl did all
of the above, and although he lost toes to
frostbite, by making the only first ascent of
an 8,000er ever to be accomplished solo,
he immortalized his deed as one of the
boldest climbs ever performed in the
Himalaya.
Suppose you did try to establish rules
about climbing on Everest or K2. What
committee would enforce them? What
gatekeeper is going to stand at base camp
and say, “Okay, you can head on up the
mountain. Nope, you better turn around
and go home.” Suppose the American
Alpine Club tried to tell Nepal or Pakistan
that they ought to limit the number of
permits they give to expeditions every year
or screen the applicants for competence.
Forget it—those impoverished countries
make serious amounts of money from
expedition permits. Who are we to tell them
how to run their business? In 2008, when
the Chinese government cleared all other
climbers off the north (Tibetan) side of
Everest so that they could carry the
Olympic torch over the summit, and even
persuaded Nepal to make radical
restrictions on the south side of the
mountain, a lot of Western climbers got
pretty pissed off. But the real victims were
the Sherpa. By now, a significant portion of
the whole Sherpa economy depends on the
spring and fall seasons on Everest. A
Sherpa who goes high to carry loads, fix
ropes, and establish camps for American or
German or Korean climbers can earn from
a single expedition most of the yearly
income that supports himself and his
family. You didn’t read much about it in the
newspapers, amid all the coverage of
protests in Paris and San Francisco and
Lhasa, but thanks to Chinese arrogance, in
2008 a lot of Sherpa people were hit hard
by the financial backlash.
As for disasters: we can’t stop the kind of
catastrophe that played out on K2 in
August 2008 from happening again. We
shouldn’t even try.
Paradoxically, the glory of mountaineering
has everything to do with this state of
affairs. Climbing is about freedom. There’s
no prize money; there are no gold medals.
The mountains are all about going there to
do what you want to do. That’s why I’ll
never tell anyone else how to climb. All I
can say is, This is how I prefer to do it.
These feelings, which are central to my
philosophy of mountaineering, rose to the
surface not only in the aftermath of 2008’s
disaster on K2, but as that tragedy made
me think all over again about my own
expedition to the world’s second-highest
mountain in 1992. Among all my thirty
expeditions to the 8,000ers, I feel now, the
K2 campaign was the one most marked by
ecstatic highs alternating with abysmal
lows. And it was also morally the most
complicated.
That expedition was a roller-coaster ride of
a learning experience for me, but I was
young, ambitious, and hungry for any type
of opportunity. That’s why I was willing to
accept and suffer all the difficulties that
were thrown into my path.
Scott Fischer and I would have preferred to
go to K2 with a solid team made up of good
friends. When I first heard that he was
organizing an expedition, and I got up the
nerve, in effect, to invite myself along, Scott
had so many teammates lined up that all he
could promise was to put me on the waiting
list. But as the trip drew near, one by one
the others dropped out, until the “team”
consisted only of Scott and me. By then we
were so broke that both of us doubted
whether we could afford an expedition to
K2.
That’s why we ended up buying slots on
somebody else’s expedition. We joined a
Russian team led by Vladimir Balyberdin,
or simply “Vlad,” as everybody called him.
On paper, the deal looked like a reasonable
quid pro quo: the Russians were eager to
sell places on their permit in order to afford
the expedition themselves, since what they
lacked above all was hard currency. Vlad
proved to be a strong climber (like me, he’d
already gotten up Everest and
Kangchenjunga), but he was a leader in
name only. Almost from the start, there
were tensions between the Russians and
the rest of us who had bought places on
the team. The word “team,” in fact, would
be an oxymoron that summer.
It was only in 1975 that the Pakistani
government caught on to the lucrative trick
of selling multiple permits to K2 in a single
season. That summer, instead of leasing
the mountain only to Americans (as it had
in 1953) or Italians (1954), the Ministry of
Tourism granted simultaneous permits to
teams from the United States, the United
Kingdom, France, Italy, the Netherlands,
Poland, Switzerland, Austria, and Japan.
“Throughout the summer,” writes K2
historian Jim Curran, “there was a more or
less continuous procession of porters
carrying supplies and equipment up the
Baltoro Glacier. The result was chaos.
“Porter stages, load sizes, fees, rest days,
etc., all became open to negotiation,”
Curran elaborates, “and almost every
expedition was dogged with strikes, goslows,
and thefts. Some expeditions even
failed to reach Base Camp and a vast
amount of ill-will was generated.”
By 1992, the authorities had worked out
most of the logistical kinks. Porter strikes
were not a problem on our approach to
base camp. After the chaos of 1975, the
Pakistani Ministry of Tourism had
established fixed wages for the porters.
Foreign climbers had to pay the
standardized rates, and the porters had to
accept them or go home. On the other
hand, when I had to hire my own porters in
Askole for the eight-day trek to base camp,
I was so poor I could afford only three
porters to carry my four loads, so I ended
up humping my own sixty-pound pack all
the way in.
Our so-called team was disorganized from
the start. To save money themselves, the
Russians had decided to drive overland all
the way to Rawalpindi. They got there long
after we Americans did. After cooling our
heels for a frustrating week as we waited
for the Russians, my teammate Thor Kieser
and I decided to snag a last-minute trekking
permit and hike in by ourselves. Scott had
already left Askole with his own trekking
permit, escorting two paying clients to base
camp in an effort to fill his nearly empty
pockets. Along the way, Thor and I caught
up with Scott and his trekkers. By the time
we arrived at base camp on June 21, only a
five-person Swiss team was on the
mountain.
In retrospect, it’s obvious to me that from
the very start, our expedition was plagued
by stress and frustration. But I was so gung
ho at the time that I ignored the
distractions. After all our preparations, it
was beyond my wildest dreams to be
camped beneath the holy grail of
mountaineering, and for weeks I floated
along on a manic high of enthusiasm and
hard work.
Not long ago, I let a friend read my K2
diary. He made an interesting observation.
“Ed,” he said, “do you realize that the
writing in your diary is far more blunt and
critical than anything you write for
publication, or anything you say when you
give a slide show?”
No, I hadn’t realized. But when I recently
reread my dairy, I saw that my friend was
right. As I’ve said, the diary was for
myself—I never expected that someday
someone else would read it. So I’m sure I
used those daily entries to vent my
frustration. I tend to be nonconfrontational,
so I guess that writing in my diary was a
way for me to let off steam. I also believe
that in certain tense situations, it’s often
best to let it ride, rather than venting
immediately, because hard feelings tend to
smooth out with time and reflection. The
question, though, is, which version is the
truer account of what happened on K2—my
diary or what I’ve written for publication?
There’s an old and honored tradition in
exploration literature that you don’t air your
dirty laundry in print. Whatever bickering,
name-calling, grudge nursing, and dark
funks really took place on the expedition,
they’re nobody else’s business. You can
read the whole of Sir John Hunt’s The
Ascent of Everest and never suspect that a
single cross word was exchanged by the
climbers who supported Hillary and
Tenzing’s monumental push to the summit.
Maurice Herzog’s Annapurna—the
bestselling mountaineering book of all time,
and the book that more than any other
inspired me as a teenager and made me
want to become a climber—characterizes
the 1950 French team as an ideal
brotherhood, with each member making
heroic sacrifices to support the others and,
in the end, even to save their lives.
When I learned, about a decade ago, that
that wasn’t the whole story, that there had
been plenty of conflict and resentment on
the first ascent of Annapurna, I felt only
slightly dismayed. By then I’d been on
enough expeditions to see for myself how
interpersonal conflicts and team dynamics
play out. The new revelations about
Annapurna didn’t change the feelings I’d
had decades earlier, when I’d first read
Herzog’s book. It still seemed a heroic tale
of struggle, camaraderie, sacrifice, and
eventual success.
With the counterculture revolution of the
late 1960s and the 1970s came a new
trend in expedition literature. In the new
narratives, the dirty laundry was not only
brought out of the closet, it was put on
prominent display. No two books more
vividly embodied this tell-it-like-it-was
aesthetic than Galen Rowell’s In the
Throne Room of the Mountain Gods and
Rick Ridgeway’s The Last Step, which
chronicled, respectively, the 1975 and 1978
American K2 expeditions. Rowell and
Ridgeway not only highlighted every
interpersonal showdown among their
teammates, they remembered (or
recreated) blistering dialogues to dramatize
them. A sample from Ridgeway:
“I just talked to Lou,” Cherie said acidly.
“I’m tired of hearing all this stuff about Terry
being upset. Everyone whispering behind
our backs. You’re all bastards. Bastards,
bastards, bastards.”
“Look, we could care less what goes on as
long as it doesn’t affect the team and the
climb,” John said.
“What do you mean what goes on? I’m sick
of all this gossiping,” Cherie started to cry.
After those two books were published,
some of the team members—the ones
portrayed in the most unfavorable light, of
course—felt betrayed. But a younger
generation of readers responded with
gleeful enthusiasm: So this is what really
goes on during expeditions. The elders of
our tribe, the traditionalists, were aghast. I
read Rowell and Ridgeway’s books when
they came out, and I could relate to what
they wrote. But I’d never publish the kinds
of intimate details from my expeditions that
they sprinkled on virtually every page of
their books.
The debate persists today, although the
tell-all school has gained a comfortable
edge. I’ve never been exactly sure where
on this spectrum my own views lie, though
they’re certainly far to the right (if right is
conservative) of Rowell and Ridgeway.
Since I’ve never written a book-length
account of any of my expeditions, I’ve
never had to commit my beliefs on this
matter to print. In No Shortcuts to the Top,
there were certainly plenty of real
antagonisms that I downplayed or even
avoided mentioning altogether. At the same
time, I’ve sometimes been accused of
being too much of a “nice guy,” even of
subscribing to that old motherly admonition
“If you don’t have something nice to say
about somebody, don’t say anything at all.”
I’d be the first to admit that the kinds of
rows and resentments recounted by Rowell
and Ridgeway are exactly what goes down
on expeditions. The question remains,
whose business is it beyond the members
of the team?
What my friend pointed out was that in the
privacy of my diary, I’m closer to Ridgeway
than I might otherwise think. K2 in 1992
was undeniably an expedition fraught with
conflict. It may be that the version of the
story that I told in Shortcuts soft-pedals that
conflict.
From the hike in onward, for instance, one
of my teammates really bugged me. Let’s
call him “Joe” to protect his identity. Here’s
some of what I wrote:
Joe already split to go to base camp. I’m
kinda glad because he’s starting to drive
me nuts. He’s always gotta pipe into a
conversation and add something. He’s
already “conquered” K2 in his mind. He has
no patience and he can’t keep his mouth
shut.
Joe went up alone today [to Camp I] and is
spending the night. That is a bit stupid in
my opinion. He’s in a hurry for no reason.
Climbing K2 is a marathon and he’s
sprinting! He’s a bit of a lost soul and I think
he’s looking for recognition and attention.
• • •
Joe talks & talks & talks. Sometimes it’s
nice to have peace & quiet but he doesn’t
know when. Scott & I keep on reading &
Joe keeps on talking. He also keeps
borrowing stuff. Doesn’t have a spoon,
toilet paper, shave cream, etc. Not very
well prepared.
Inevitably, on expeditions, cabin fever sets
in. You’re in such close proximity to your
partners day and night, 24-7, and under
such tension about whether you can get up
the mountain or not, that every last thing
some guy does or says can drive you
crazy. It gets especially bad when you’re
trapped together inside a small tent during
a long storm. It can get so that the very
sound of him chewing his breakfast or
blowing his nose threatens to push you off
the deep end.
This can happen even between best
friends, let alone among virtual strangers
you’re thrown together with on an
expedition. Fortunately, in 1992 I was with
Scott most of the time, and we got along
great. That was a particularly good thing,
since neither of us ever bonded with the
Russians.
Another source of tension that summer was
the perception on the part of a few that we
were competing with the international team
led by Rob Hall and Gary Ball. Both of our
teams would be hard-pressed to find
adequate campsites on the Abruzzi Ridge.
It was usually first come, first served when
it came to grabbing those precious sites.
It was at base camp that I first met that
famous New Zealand duo—Hall & Ball, as
everybody called them. They had a vast
amount of experience in the Himalaya, and
they’d pulled off a tour de force by climbing
the Seven Summits—the highest peak on
every continent—in only seven months.
And this was already their third attempt on
K2.
When I first shook hands with Hall & Ball, I
thought, Oh my God, these guys are
superstars. They’ll leave me in the dust.
But Scott told me, “Take it easy, Ed.
They’re just normal guys.” Then, on the
mountain, I discovered that I was as strong
as or stronger than these superclimbers.
There were days when I broke trail and
fixed rope for them and Hall & Ball trudged
into camp hours after I did. That was a real
revelation.
During those first weeks, Scott and I paired
up with Hall & Ball to fix ropes up the lower
part of the Abruzzi Ridge. (Only a few of
the other members of our team contributed
to this effort; the rest seemed unwilling or
unable.) In general, Hall & Ball cooperated
well with Scott and me as we shared the
grunt work of establishing the route. I got
more and more frustrated by some of the
half-assed efforts of other guys on the
mountain. Some of them would carry only
the lightest loads; they’d claim the
conditions weren’t good enough for a heavy
carry. And sometimes they’d get only
halfway to the higher camp so they’d just
dump their loads in the snow and head
down. I picked up a bunch of those loads,
but I drew the line at carrying other guys’
oxygen bottles for them. If they couldn’t get
their own oxygen to the higher camps, how
the hell did they expect to use that oxygen
to go for the summit? Eventually, we
worked it out so that the folks hoping to use
oxygen higher up labeled their bottles with
their names. That made them solely
responsible for moving the bottles up the
mountain.
It would have helped a lot if Vlad had
turned out to be a real leader. But from the
get-go, Vlad was strictly doing his own
thing. He was just not a team player. So
without any real plan or structure in place,
everybody else started doing his or her own
thing as well.
The frustration of taking on more than my
share of the work, of having other climbers
shirk their responsibilities, and of having no
leader who would assign tasks built inside
me into a towering resentment. But I kept it
all inside; I never blew up and chewed
anybody else out. (That’s typical for me, I’m
afraid—I tend to avoid overt conflict.)
I didn’t mention this in Shortcuts, but the
reason I tried Everest solo the next year
was because of my disappointment with the
poor teamwork on K2. I’ll always pull my
own weight, and I’m happy to pull even
more than my weight, as long as others
genuinely try to contribute. But after I got
back from Pakistan, I said to myself, Look
at how much time and energy you wasted
on other people. Why not go on an
expedition where all that time and energy
benefits yourself?
On rereading my diary, I discovered that
even before I got to Pakistan, I’d
anticipated the underlying problem that
would divide our team from within. On June
6, as I sat in JFK airport waiting for my
flight to Asia, I wrote:
Hopefully Scott & I will jell and climb as a
strong team on K2. There will be a fair
amount of attrition from the other team
members but that doesn’t surprise or worry
me. It’s typical on a long, arduous trip such
as this. Scott is built like a brick shithouse
and we’ve put a lot of sweat & tears into
this, so there is no lack of desire. We
haven’t climbed together, but I feel we
know each other well enough by now to
form a solid, strong team.
By 1992, I already knew that the
thoroughness and intensity of preparation
you put into an expedition translate directly
into commitment on the mountain. Before
K2, Scott and I had spent ten months
planning, training, and scrounging together
the dough to afford our expedition. By the
time we got to base camp, we were truly
committed, and we were willing to stay as
long as we needed to in order to get up the
mountain.
The same wasn’t true of all of our American
teammates. They were all gung ho at the
start, but after a month, some of them lost
motivation and started complaining about
how hard everything was. Scott and I
wanted to say to them, “Of course it’s hard.
What did you sign up for?” (In their
defense, a few members of our team did
have inflexible deadlines by which they had
to return to their jobs.)
Climbing an 8,000er is a sufferfest. You
need a lot of patience. As it turned out,
after forty days on K2, Scott and I weren’t
even thinking about going home. I didn’t
have a girlfriend then, or a steady job, or
any other particular reason to go home. I
thought, Hell, I’ll stay here for four months if
I have to.
That doesn’t mean I didn’t have my
apprehensions about the climb beforehand.
Downing a couple of beers at JFK, I wrote:
So many things can happen for better or
worse. I just hope we all return safe and
can count to 20 using our fingers & toes.
With the right weather, good conditions and
health, we can climb K2. But it’s gonna be
a bitch.
Throughout my eighteen years of
attempting 8,000-meter peaks, I’ve always
been a stickler for getting into great
physical shape before each expedition. I’ve
felt that my training during the months prior
to a climb would not only increase my
chances of success but would make me
climb more safely. If I could climb faster
and stay strong day after day, I could
minimize some of the inevitable risks of
exposure on those great peaks. With a
bank of endurance stored up, even if
something went wrong at the end of a long
day, I hoped I would have the strength to
keep moving. If I failed on an expedition
because of lack of preparation or training, I
would have only myself to blame.
Not every Himalayan mountaineer feels the
same way. The legendary British climber
Don Whillans was famous for letting himself
go between expeditions, drinking heavily
and eating so much he actually got fat. On
the hike in to his next objective, his own
porters sometimes teased Whillans about
how out of shape and overweight he was.
Amazingly, on the mountain he always
rounded into form. He reached the summit
on one of the greatest expeditions in
Himalayan history—the south face of
Annapurna in 1970—and he was one of the
strongest climbers on the pathbreaking
attempts on the southwest face of Everest
in the early 1970s. On the other hand,
Whillans died of a heart attack at the age of
only fifty-two. His lifestyle almost certainly
contributed to his early death.
Right from the start on K2, my training paid
off. Even in my diary, I’m not comfortable
bragging about being fitter than other guys
on a climb, but some of my entries make it
pretty clear that that’s what was going on.
On July 2, I wrote:
We had planned to finish fixing all the way
to C II today. Everyone was slow today, so
I grabbed 3 ropes and started out by 6:45
A.M. Had to re-break trail to our high point
of last eve. Got there by 8:30. Everyone
was still way back so I started stringing
rope on my own…. Fun, 3rd class stuff.
Rob [Hall] finally caught up but was going
slow so I kept leading out.
Scott typically didn’t train as hard as I did,
but he had tremendous natural stamina.
The genes he was born with enabled him to
look like Captain America without really
having to work too hard at it. He also had
the distractions of a family and a business,
which limited his workout time. As early as
June 26, I wrote, “It was fun to climb with
Scott today. He’s super strong, competent
and easy-going. I hope we summit
together.”
From the start, as it turned out, Scott and I
were slightly stronger than Hall & Ball. And
they were planning to use supplemental
oxygen up high; Scott and I were not. Still,
we felt a huge respect for these likable
veterans, and I was thrilled to work hand in
hand with them. Their previous knowledge
of the route was invaluable. On July 1,
Scott and I reached Camp I before Hall &
Ball and set up our tent. From my diary:
“We left a bomber site for the Kiwis just to
be nice & diplomatic. Otherwise it looks like
we’re racing each other up the mountain
just for good tent sites.” Usually, when you
get to a camp—especially on a route like
the Abruzzi, where there are so few good
platforms—you grab the best site you can
find and claim it with your tent. Instead,
Scott and I deliberately left the best
platform for Rob and Gary, just so they
wouldn’t think we were being
hypercompetitive about getting up the
mountain first.
At about 21,500 feet on the Abruzzi, you
encounter the first real technical obstacle
on the route. It’s an 80-foot-tall fissure that
splits a nearly vertical rock cliff; in the back
of the fissure there’s usually a narrow gully
of hard ice. The pitch is called “House’s
Chimney,” after Bill House, the American
who first climbed it in 1938. It took House
two and a half hours of desperate struggle
to get up the chimney, which forms the crux
of the route all the way up to the Shoulder,
at 26,000 feet.
According to Jim Curran:
In 1980 Peter Boardman, arguably Britain’s
best Himalayan climber at the time, climbed
House’s Chimney and was impressed and
surprised at its technical difficulty. He
thought that when it was first climbed it
must have been the hardest pitch in the
Himalaya. Certainly it was far harder than
anything climbed on Everest in the 1920s
and 1930s.
As it turned out, on July 2 Scott and I were
the first climbers from our team to reach the
base of House’s Chimney. One of us would
get to lead it, going first on the rope and
placing “protection” to shorten a possible
fall. Then, once the leader had climbed the
pitch, he’d string fixed ropes for all the
other climbers to use. Although the Swiss
team had gone up the chimney before us,
as they were attempting a fast and light
ascent, they’d relied on the decaying
strands of rope from previous years that
still hung down the crack. Scott and I didn’t
trust those old, frayed ropes, and we
weren’t about to put all our weight on them.
We’d been anticipating this moment since
long before we’d left Seattle. Now Scott
and I drew straws to see who would get the
“sharp end.” I won and led the pitch. My
diary sounds almost nonchalant about the
climbing: “It was a narrow, vertical snow &
ice-choked crack. Fun climbing up and
stemming.” I remember, however, being
quite impressed with the lead Bill House
had pulled off fifty-four years earlier.
We’d been on K2 for only two weeks, but
already, scattered around the Baltoro, other
expeditions were throwing in the towel and
going home. From my diary:
Many failures so far in the Karakoram area.
The Swiss tried to climb K2 in just 4 wks.
From a very low C II they tried alpine style
to go for it. They encountered deep snow
on the Black Pyramid. Too early in the
season? IE still too much snow yet?
Germans & Koreans just gave up yesterday
on Broad Peak also. [Steve] Swenson &
company gave up on GIV [Gasherbrum IV]
due to deep snow also. Now they’re on GII
we believe.
It’s only early in the season yet. We’ve still
got lots of time.
By July 8, we were on the verge of
establishing Camp III at 24,000 feet. I’d had
one bad day at Camp II; I’d felt lightheaded
after breakfast, then unusually tired going
up the hill. “Not quite acclimatized I can
tell,” I wrote in my diary. By the next day,
however, I felt as good as new, and I was
raring to go. Because of the weather,
though, we descended to base camp, at
16,800 feet, to rest for several days. “Climb
high, sleep low” has become a formula for
success on the 8,000ers, overturning the
earlier notion that the longer you stayed
high, the better you acclimatized. The truth
of the matter is that above 20,000 feet or
so, the body slowly deteriorates, no matter
what kind of shape you’re in. Those rest
days down low are vital to regenerating for
the summit push.
I still felt vexed by the unequal efforts some
of our teammates were putting out. On July
11, I complained to my diary, “No real
‘power-carriers’ on this trip. 10# [pound]
loads are about max. I’m used to climbing
with guys from RMI that carry 50# no sweat
& don’t even bat an eye. Scott carries big
like me, but that’s the exception.” Despite
this disappointment, I was feeling
increasingly positive about our chances,
and I sketched out possible scenarios for
the upcoming days. The most optimistic
had us establishing Camp IV on the
Shoulder at 26,000 feet only four days
hence. From that camp, we hoped
eventually to reach the summit in a single
day. “If it all works out,” I scribbled, “come
down rest 4–5 days, wait for good weather
& go for it!”
Fat chance. K2 wasn’t going to give up that
easily. On July 12, we suffered our first real
setback. At the time, it felt like a huge one.
Scott and I had set off from base camp that
morning at 5:00 A.M., hoping to climb all
the way to Camp II in one day. Just before
you reach the base of the Abruzzi Ridge,
you have to wend your way through a funky
little icefall. It’s technically trivial but
potentially dangerous. We always roped up
going through the icefall, even though most
of the others, including the Russians, didn’t
bother.
That morning, Scott was leading as he
wound his way through the maze of cracks
and ice towers. He stepped on a chunk of
ice that was wedged across the mouth of a
small crevasse. The chunk shifted under
his weight, and he fell. There was no
danger that he’d fall very far into the
crevasse, as I held him on a tight rope.
Instinctively, Scott stuck out his arms to
catch the fall. And as he hit the glacial
surface, he screamed in pain. “Shit!” he
yelled. “I’ve dislocated my shoulder again!”
It turned out that Scott had dislocated the
same shoulder in a fall about twelve years
before. “We got him slung up and left his
pack,” I recorded that evening in my diary.
“[Scott] walked to the end of the moraine in
extreme pain & had to stop a few times. I
left him there and ran to get Yuri, our
doctor.”
Once they realized Scott had had an
accident, a number of other climbers
helped out with the “rescue.” Yuri Stefanski,
the Russian doctor, relocated Scott’s
shoulder and gave him painkillers and
muscle relaxants. But he told Scott, “You
must go home. The expedition is over for
you.”
Scott refused to accept that verdict,
claiming he’d be back in action in a week.
I’m not sure either of us believed his boast.
“Scott is way bummed,” I wrote in my diary,
back in base camp. And I was just as
bummed myself. In a silly little accident, no
more dramatic than tripping over a street
curb, my partner had been put out of
commission indefinitely.
Until that moment, I don’t think I’d realized
how much I was counting on our two-man
teamwork. I’d always envisioned Scott and
I working our way up the mountain
together, then embracing on the summit.
Now, as I brooded in the night, I faced the
real possibility that if I got to the top of K2, it
might be with some other partner. I had
begun to connect with a couple of the
stronger climbers on my team, Neal
Beidleman and Charley Mace, as well as
Hall & Ball. Perhaps they would be the
ones I could go to the summit with. Yet at
this point in the expedition there wasn’t
another guy on our team I thought of as a
truly close friend, and there sure wasn’t
anybody I trusted the way I trusted Scott.
In the absence of any real leadership from
Vlad, the rest of us decided we needed to
designate someone as climbing leader.
During one of our mealtime meetings, with
Vlad absent, off doing his own thing, we
took a vote, and to my surprise, I got
elected. Right away, I tried to put some
semblance of order into the
logistics—figuring out who would carry
what supplies to which camp, and so on.
There was no telling the Russians what to
do, however. The only loyalty they had was
to one another, and as far as I could tell,
there wasn’t even much of that.
Another thing that disturbed me was that
the Russians seemed willing to climb in
really dangerous conditions. In turn, they
sometimes acted as if the rest of us were
wusses. One day when Vlad got back to
camp, he turned to me and asked, “Why do
you not go today?”
“Because I thought there was tremendous
avalanche danger,” I answered. I didn’t say
out loud what I really thought: Dude, we’re
not suicidal like you!
I wondered at the time whether this
propensity for really hanging it out there
was part of a peculiarly Russian style in the
Himalaya. On Everest in 1990, I’d climbed
with Soviets on Jim Whittaker’s
International Peace Climb. There, the
Russians had also seemed willing to climb
in worse conditions than the rest of us.
They tend to be highly competitive within
their own ranks, as they gain status and
honor in their home country with every
success they achieve. On later expeditions,
though I wasn’t partnering with Russians, I
noticed that they often acted in a similar
way. Right or wrong, they have their own
way of winning a prized spot on an
expedition, and once on the team they all
silently push one another very hard.
During the ten days after Scott dislocated
his shoulder, the weather was consistently
bad. My optimism took a solid hit. Even
though I was the nominal climbing leader, I
couldn’t bully some of the others into
pulling their own weight. Instead, I just got
frustrated and grouchy—and my diary
reflects that mood.
July 14: Our goal is to establish CIII, finish
fixing to CIII & pick up all the shit between
CII & CIII. That’s a major problem on these
trips. Most people only make half carries &
dump shit all over the place!
July 15: Always anxious only because got
lots to do & I have to get people organized.
I wanted to work with Rob to finish fixing
into CIII cause he knows where it should go
so I waited for him. By 7:30 he still wasn’t
ready so I took off alone.
Same day: Got down to CII at 4 P.M. after
a lot of raps [rappels]…. Got to CII and
Alex, Gnady and Dan arrived. A full-on
cluster fuck! They all wanted to sleep @
CIII tomorrow as did we. They don’t even
give us room to breathe! I was pissed off!
We simply didn’t have enough tents for all
of us to sleep at Camp III. Our climbing
logistics still needed some fine-tuning.
In my frustration, in the privacy of my diary,
I recorded my own nicknames for some of
the other climbers. The Swedish team were
“sheep.” A pair of brothers whose last
name rhymed with my epithet became “the
weenies.” But my bitching in the diary was
more than sour grapes. I really thought that
our so-called team effort was held together
by less than a shoestring.
July 17: I can’t keep the group organized as
climbing leader cause they (most anyway)
aren’t strong enough or experienced
enough to be out front so they just scoot
around dropping loads all over the
mountains! They are gonna falter big time
up high.”
Even sometimes when a teammate
genuinely tried to help lead or push
supplies, it backfired. On July 19, as we
were carrying loads from Camp I to Camp
II, an American teammate told me to go
first, since I was faster. But then,
inexplicably, as I wrote in my diary,
Just as I get going he jumps on the [fixed]
ropes right in front of me. What am I
supposed to do? Climb up his ass? So I
wait & wait & just go slowly right behind him
& take my time. He stopped constantly to
bend over & breathe, looking back down at
me—staring. Drove me nuts!… Finally he
stopped @ CII & I blew by to CIII.
There was one woman on our team, but it
was clear to me from early on that she
wasn’t strong or experienced enough to get
high on the mountain. That summer, the
only really talented and ambitious woman
on K2 was Chantal Mauduit. Although she
was French, she had been a member of the
Swiss team. When they gave up and went
home, Chantal stayed on—which, strictly
speaking, in terms of her permit, was
illegal. According to the rules in Pakistan,
once the expedition leader leaves the
mountain, the rest of the team must do so
as well.
By 1992, only three women had climbed
K2—all three during the disastrous summer
of 1986. And by now, all three were dead.
Liliane Barrard and Julie Tullis had died on
the descent that year, after making the
summit. The Pole Wanda Rutkiewicz, the
finest high-altitude woman climber of her
day (and perhaps of all time), had survived
K2 only to die just a month before the
beginning of our 1992 expedition on
Kangchen-junga, when she was caught in a
storm near the summit.
Though it may seem macabre, the fact that
no living woman had succeeded on K2 lent
a huge cachet to Chantal’s effort. She was
already famous in France for other exploits,
but it would mean a huge boost in celebrity
and sponsorship if she could get up K2.
Chantal was a very beautiful woman, with
long brown hair and sparkling eyes. She
had a habit of flirting with virtually
everybody. I found it disconcerting—when
she gave me a certain look, did it mean
something special or was it simply the way
she interacted with all the male climbers on
the mountain? In any event, everybody
seemed to like Chantal.
One of my American teammates, Thor
Kieser, had had a previous relationship with
Chantal, but she had broken it off. I got the
feeling that Thor was still in love with her.
And she still liked him well enough to
agree, after the Swiss had gone home, to
pair up with him for her own summit effort.
With Scott out of action, I started to climb a
lot with Neal Beidleman. He was an
aerospace engineer from Aspen, very
successful in his profession. He was also a
solid climber, one of the few guys on the
mountain who really pulled his own weight.
We got along well right from the start. What
I especially liked about Neal was his
strength, the depth of his climbing
experience, and his easygoing personality.
Unfortunately, he had work commitments
back in the States and planned to leave
base camp on August 5 to get back to his
job, so it looked as though he’d have at
most one shot at the summit.
Through the last week of July, the weather
remained mostly bad. This didn’t stop the
more overeager climbers from trying to
force their way up the mountain. They
included three of the Russians, Vlad,
Gennadi Kopeika, and Aleksei Nikiforov (I
called the last two Gnady and Alex), as well
as Thor and Chantal. Because it had
snowed so much, the climbing conditions
were pretty sketchy.
On July 20, Neal and I finally got a tent
pitched at Camp III, at 24,000 feet, and
spent the night in it. In the morning it was
snowing and windy, with a smothering
whiteout. It was obvious to me that it was
still too soon for a serious summit effort, but
the more antsy climbers didn’t see it that
way. I wrote in my diary that night, “Vlad
took off with personal gear & Thor decided
he was also gonna sleep @ CIV & try for
the top. Yuk, yuk, yuk!”
The only sensible thing was to go down.
But still trying to be team players, Neal and
I carried a tent, a rope, willow wands, and a
snow shovel above Camp III toward where
the route steepens to gain the Shoulder, in
support of Vlad.
I caught up to Vlad & told him it was no use
to continue with zero vis[ibility] and
snowing. He insisted on continuing so we
gave him the tent and bailed. Thor &
Chantal were also more than happy to turn.
(Vlad eventually camped right about where
we left him! He learns the hard way.)
Neal and I went back down to Camp III and
spent the rest of the day debating what to
do. As the weather progressively
worsened, we made our decision and
started descending with headlamps. By
9:30 that night, Neal and I got all the way
down to base camp.
For weeks now, I’d been almost constantly
irritated by the lack of teamwork within our
“team.” At base, I had a long, hard think
about it, at the end of which I had what I
called in my diary a “revelation.” “I’ve done
more than my share of teamwork—fixing,
hauling, etc.,” I wrote. “From now on I make
my own moves/decisions.” I went on to jot
down a possible scenario. If the weather
settled and the snow conditions improved,
on my own summit attempt I’d take a oneman
bivy tent and a stove. I hoped Neal or
even Scott could go with me, but I was
ready to try for the top solo. Energized by
this decision, I wrote in my diary, “It’s a
good plan and the rest of the team can
cluster fuck all they want! Hoka hay!”
Meanwhile, at base camp Scott had been
recuperating faster than anyone thought
possible. We had helped him rig a special
kind of shoulder brace that allowed him to
use his injured arm for jumaring up fixed
ropes but prevented him from raising that
hand above chest level. On July 25—only
thirteen days after he had dislocated the
shoulder—he gave it a test run on a solo
carry up to Camp I. He still felt a fair
amount of pain, but, tough guy to the end,
he figured he could climb all right with it. I
was overjoyed to have my buddy back in
action.
Finally the weather was turning good. I still
wasn’t in any hurry to dash up the
mountain, because I knew that after all the
storms, the snow conditions would be
atrocious. But by July 27, a kind of anxious
frenzy had taken hold of the climbers who
were ambitious to get to the top. I was still
entertaining thoughts about going solo on
my own summit push, and the last thing I
wanted to do was get railroaded into an
attempt because others were chomping at
the bit.
Ambivalence is one of the hardest states of
mind to handle on an expedition. That
night, in a fit of vexation, I wrote in my
diary:
The weather is good. I’ll get ready to go &
decide tonight…. So I’ll be ready to go
whenever. Everyone keeps hounding
me—when am I going up? Fuck, leave me
alone! I don’t want to go with a huge pack
of idiots. Too many people & they all want
to go at once. We have so much time, but
all of a sudden it’s got to be a mad dash.
The Abruzzi Ridge may indeed be the
easiest route on K2, but it’s no cakewalk.
All through that summer on the mountain, I
was acutely aware of a startling historical
fact. The last successful ascent of the
Abruzzi had come in 1986—and of the
many climbers on the route that year, six
had died on the descent. In the intervening
years, 1987 through 1991, fourteen
different expeditions had attacked the
Abruzzi Ridge. Not a single climber from
any of those fourteen parties had reached
the summit.
By 1992, only five Americans had climbed
K2: Jim Wickwire and his three teammates
by the northeast ridge in 1978, and Steve
Swenson on the north ridge in 1990. No
Americans had yet climbed the Abruzzi.
Although that was not a major factor in my
motivation, I couldn’t help but realize that I
might be part of the first American team to
get up the classic line by which K2 had first
been climbed in 1954.
On July 29, Thor, Chantal, Neal, and I
fought our way back up to CIII. We found it
completely buried in snow—there wasn’t
even the top of a tent pole sticking out of
the drifts. We spent hours digging out the
camp. One tent had been completely
destroyed; the other was salvageable, but
when we repitched it, it was so cramped
that it offered room, as I put it in my diary,
only “for one and a half people.” I helped
Thor and Chantal set up their own tent,
then crawled into my coffinlike bivy tent.
Neal settled into the tent we had just
repitched. Later in the day, Vlad and Gnady
arrived from below, climbed through, and
eventually camped slightly above us. Alex
was also headed up, about a day behind.
It was a miserable night; I didn’t sleep very
well, as I had to keep getting up to shovel
new snow and spindrift off my shelter. In
the morning, the wind was still howling.
“Tough decision as to what to do,” I wrote
later. “It’s Neal’s last shot but it’s terrible up
here. Decided to bail down. Thor & Chantal
stayed. Really bad going down.”
From the lower camps, our communication
with our “teammates” was limited to a
prearranged 7:00 P.M. radio call. These
calls were cryptic and frustrating at best, as
the Russians translated little of their
information for us. Sometimes the Russian
chatter droned interminably on and we
simply gave up listening, since we seemed
to be excluded anyway. On July 31, those
of us back in base camp waited nervously.
Finally we got some news. “Vlad [and
Gnady] made it to bottom of summit
pyramid,” I recorded in my diary. “Alex is at
CIII and Thor is ? Very nice day, but Vlad
said snow was chest deep.”
August 1 was another good day on the
mountain. I was still biding my time before
making my own surge up the mountain. For
Neal, any hopes of the summit had been
dashed, but by now Scott was back in good
shape and ready to charge. That day, we
knew, Vlad and Gnady were going for the
top. Forty-one days after I’d arrived at base
camp, somebody from our team was finally
making a serious assault.
Yet 7:00 P.M. came and went with no radio
call from the summit pair. Granted, I had
never formed any close friendships with the
Russians, and Vlad had really ticked me off
with his every-man-for-himself philosophy.
That day, however, I couldn’t help but worry
about what was going on high on K2, as I
silently pleaded with the mountain gods to
be kind to those two determined climbers.
We all tried to send positive energy their
way.
Finally we found out what had happened.
Vlad and Gnady had left Camp IV, pitched
on the Shoulder at 26,000 feet, at 3:00
A.M. Hindered by deep snow, they had
climbed agonizingly slowly, but they’d
refused to turn around. They’d reached the
summit together at 9:00 P.M., after
eighteen hours of climbing.
When I found this out, I was astounded and
disturbed. In my book, eighteen hours was
far too long to keep going for the summit,
and 9:00 P.M. was far too late to get there.
But these were really tough guys. Did I
think I could climb any faster? On my own
summit attempt, what could I do differently?
“Should we leave CIV @ 8 P.M.?” I mused
in my diary. “Gonna be a bitch!”
That night, Gnady made it down to Camp
IV, but Vlad bivouacked, exhausted, below
the summit. Remarkably, he not only
survived the night but suffered no frostbite.
The two Russians descended all the way to
base camp on August 3.
Meanwhile, on August 2, Thor, Chantal,
and Alex had climbed to the Shoulder and
set up their own camp at 26,000 feet. Their
plan was to go for the summit in the
morning.
The same day they made their attempt,
August 3, Scott and I finally launched our
own summit bid. At last, all our hard work
on the mountain was paying dividends. To
save time and take advantage of the good
weather, we climbed 7,500 vertical feet,
from base all the way to Camp III, in a
single sustained push. It took me only
eleven hours to make that monumental
ascent, Scott a few hours longer. In terms
of sheer efficiency of movement, that day
remains one of the best I have ever had in
the mountains.
As we climbed, of course, we had no idea
what was going on with our three
teammates above. At Camp III, we listened
to the 7:00 P.M. radio call, but there was no
word of their progress. In those days it was
not unusual not to make any calls during a
summit push, because you were so caught
up in the effort of climbing or hadn’t even
bothered to carry the bulky radio with you.
Our only option was to keep the radio on
and wait for word from the summit trio.
As you climb the Abruzzi Ridge, for
thousands of feet the summit pyramid is out
of sight, eclipsed by the cliffs and slopes
above you. It’s only when you reach the
Shoulder, at 26,000 feet, that the majestic
upper sweep of the mountain suddenly
bursts into view.
Caught up as we were in our own great day
of climbing, Scott and I didn’t give much
thought to Thor, Chantal, and Alex. They
were experienced climbers who ought to be
able to take care of themselves. Inside our
sleeping bags at Camp III, Scott and I were
wired and exuberant. The next day we
would push on to Camp IV. If the weather
held, we would go for the top on August 5.
We were too excited to get to sleep at first.
Instead, we just tossed and turned in our
bags. And then, at 10:00 P.M., we heard
the crackle of our radio. I sat up, turned on
my headlamp, grabbed the walkie-talkie,
and answered the call.
It was Thor, transmitting from Camp IV.
“Hey, guys,” he said. I could hear the
tension in his voice. “Chantal and Alex
aren’t back. I don’t know where they are.”
Oh, shit! I said to myself. In the headlamp
beam, I looked at Scott. He had the same
look of disgust and concern on his face.
There goes our summit try, I thought.
Thor and Alex, it turned out, had left Camp
IV at 5:30 that morning. Chantal hadn’t
gotten off until 7:00. But then, even though
she was climbing without bottled oxygen,
she caught up with the two guys in the
Bottleneck and surged past them. It was an
extraordinary performance at such an
altitude.
After a long, hard day of climbing, realizing
he would reach the summit too late in the
day, rather than risking a bivouac, Thor
prudently gave up his attempt just a few
hundred feet below the top and headed
down. As he would learn only the next day,
Chantal had pushed on and reached the
summit at 5:00 P.M. Alex didn’t top out until
7:00. On the descent, he came across
Chantal. Afraid to go down by herself in the
dark, she had started to bivouac. Almost
berating her, he roused her out of her
apathy and convinced her to go down with
him.
At first light on August 4, Scott and I
prepared to head up from Camp III. Our
summit attempt had been transformed into
a rescue mission or, even worse, into a
search for missing climbers. But then, at
7:00 A.M., Thor came on the radio again.
Alex and Chantal had just arrived,
staggering into camp after a descent that
had stretched through the whole night.
Chantal was completely exhausted,
snowblind, and suffering from what she
thought was frostbite. Alex had saved her
life, but now, as if he felt he had done all
that was required of him, the Russian
dumped Chantal in Thor’s lap and headed
on down the mountain. He barely said
good-bye.
Chantal was still virtually helpless. So,
Scott and I realized, it would now be our job
to go to her aid. Thor could never get her
down to base camp by himself. At least, I
thought as I gathered gear for our mission,
it was a rescue and not a search.
That morning, however, everything seemed
to conspire against us. By the time Scott
and I got going, the visibility had dropped to
almost zero, and the snow conditions were
really bad. For a couple of hours, barely
able to see where we were going, we
plowed upward through deep snow, before
deciding to call it quits and head back.
Late that evening, Alex came into sight
above Camp III. He was pretty wasted. We
climbed up a little way to help him down,
got him into a tent, and brewed up lots of
drinks, because he was severely
dehydrated. It surprised me that at this
point, Alex didn’t even seem curious about
what was going on with Chantal.
That same day, Thor had started down
from Camp IV, leading Chantal, who could
barely see her feet in front of her. Because
of the marginal conditions, they got only a
short distance before having to stop on the
lower edge of the Shoulder. Fortunately,
Thor had brought a tent, but the emergency
shelter he set up on that precarious slope
was more like a bivoauc than a true camp. I
could only imagine the monumental task he
had taking care of Chantal in such trying
circumstances.
The next day, August 5, Scott and I got up
at 4:30 A.M., then waited for a break in the
weather to head back up, since the
situation above us seemed to be getting
more dire by the hour. Alex was too wiped
out to help at all; later that day he would
head down from Camp III on his own.
Finally the weather improved just enough.
Scott and I were off at 7:30. There were
clouds scudding by, alternating with
sunbursts. The snow everywhere was deep
and soft.
By midday, we had reached the last
headwall beneath the Shoulder.
Suddenly we caught sight of Thor and
Chantal, two small dots above us flickering
in and out of clouds and mist. The wind
was blowing steadily in a minor gale, and
little spindrift avalanches had started sliding
down the headwall.
Throughout the expedition so far, I had
always erred on the side of caution. I’d
refused to climb in conditions the Russians
seemed to think were worth the risk. I’d
headed down when cockier climbers
headed up. Now, all at once, I felt that the
slope Scott and I were trying to climb was
ready to avalanche. Scott hadn’t yet come
to the same realization—I attribute that to
the fact that I’d done a lot more guiding
than he had and had learned to be
hypervigilant about avalanche conditions.
“Wait a minute, Scott,” I said. “This is not a
good slope.”
It’s an eternal and inevitable fact in
mountaineering, as in most dangerous
pursuits, that you can get sucked into
exceeding the boundaries of your own best
judgment of acceptable risk when you go to
the rescue of someone else in trouble. The
classic example occurred on K2 in 1953,
when, trying to save the life of a crippled
teammate, seven members of the
American expedition came extremely close
to dying in one horrible, interlinked fall. That
accident had taken place almost exactly
where Scott and I now stood.
Later I would think about the sad fate of
Jean-Marc Boivin. One of the finest French
climbers of his day, he was also, during the
1980s, the boldest extreme skier in the
world. Boivin performed scores of first ski
descents in the Alps, on couloirs and faces
where the slightest slip meant certain
death. He also perfected the arts of BASE
jumping and para-penting (hang gliding
with a frameless parachute that unfurls
from a pack on your back). In 1988 he
electrified the climbing world by jumping off
the summit of Everest and parapenting to a
lower camp in only twelve minutes.
In 1990, at the age of thirty-nine, Boivin
was starring in a made-for-TV adventure for
Ushuaya, a chic French documentary show
about extreme sports. He and a female
costar were set to BASE jump off a cliff
near Angel Falls, Venezuela—a piece of
cake for Boivin. But when the woman,
jumping first, hit the cliff glancingly on the
way down, Boivin impetuously jumped to
go to her aid, without making his usual
meticulous preparations. He hit a tree near
the bottom of the jump, then lay on the
ground, injured. A helicopter flew by to
rescue him, but Boivin signaled the pilot to
go after his costar first. She survived,
miraculously, with only minor injuries. By
the time the chopper had returned to gather
up Boivin, he had died of internal
hemorrhaging. He left behind a wife and
small children.
If we had been climbing only for our own
reasons, to get to the Shoulder and
establish Camp IV, Scott and I would not
have pushed the head-wall in the
conditions that now engulfed us. It was the
very real possibility that Chantal—and
perhaps Thor, as well—might die without
our help that drove us to such an extreme
and dangerous effort.
Scott and I were roped together with a fiftyfoot
line I had scrounged at Camp III. By
now, I had a foreboding sense of imminent
disaster. “Man,” I said to Scott, “let’s not get
ourselves killed doing this.” The slope we
were climbing seemed triggered to
avalanche at any moment. Scott, who was
above me, sat down on the slope, facing
out. Almost in a panic, I started digging
frantically with my ice ax, trying to excavate
a hole I could hunker down in if the
avalanche came. My thought was that this
pocket in the snow would protect me from
the brunt of the blow if the slope cut loose.
And then, sure enough, it came. Scott
never saw it. I had time just to look up and
see a wave of snow swallow him before he
disappeared from sight. I quickly tucked my
head and upper body into my hole, thrust
the pick of my ax into the slope, and put all
my weight on top of it. The slide took so
long to carry Scott down the slope and then
past me that I began to think, Wow, I got
away with it!
Then—boom! The rope came tight in a
wrenching jolt, and I was plucked out of my
little hole like a knife out of butter. I started
careening down the slope fifty feet above
Scott. There was just enough time for me to
anticipate the 8,000-foot fall to the
glacier—and to oblivion.
The instincts born of my years of RMI
training clicked in. Arrest! Arrest! my brain
screamed. Even as I cartwheeled down the
slope, I flipped onto my stomach and got
my head uphill, with the ax held in both
hands under my chest. I dug and dug with
the pick, only to feel it slice through soft
snow. Scott, I later learned, had been
unable to get in position even to attempt a
self-arrest.
We had probably fallen a couple of hundred
feet when all of a sudden my ax bit into
some ice and we came to a stop. My selfarrest
had finally done the job. I rolled over
and yelled out, “Scott, are you okay?”
I couldn’t have been more relieved by his
answer. “Yeah, but my nuts are killing me!”
he screamed. If Scott was together enough
to complain about his harness jamming his
balls, he had to be all right.
All the same, we had come within inches of
taking the big plunge. That was by far the
closest brush with death I had experienced
in my sixteen years of mountaineering.
Scott and I pulled ourselves together. I got
Thor on the radio and warned him not to
come down the slope that had just
avalanched. “Go over to your left,” I
pleaded, “toward this ice-cliffy area, and
maybe rappel.” Then we climbed up, still
hoping to guide Thor and Chantal down.
Finally, at 25,500 feet, we closed the gap.
“Man,” Thor exclaimed, “am I glad to see
you guys!”
We laid Chantal on her back, right there in
the snow. I managed to pry her eyelids
open and douse her eyes with anesthetic
drops. Then we tied in as a rope of four,
with Scott going first and myself in the rear
as anchor. Late that afternoon, we at last
made it down to Camp III. We got Chantal
into a sleeping bag. I checked her feet; they
weren’t frostbitten, just terribly cold. We
melted pot after pot of snow to nurse both
Thor and Chantal with hot drinks.
Throughout the retreat, Chantal never
thanked us once. Instead, over and over
again, she pealed, “I made the summit! I’m
so happy!” It would not be the last time this
strong and beautiful Frenchwoman would
use up all her reserves getting to the top of
an 8,000er only to collapse and depend on
other climbers to get her down the
mountain.
Scott and I knew what the rescue had cost
us. Our summit attempt was now on
indefinite hold. The more pressing duty was
to get Chantal, still exhausted, and Thor, in
only marginally better shape, safely down
the mountain.
By midnight on August 6, all of us had
made it back to base camp in one piece.
Scott and I were pretty tired ourselves, but
beyond that, we were profoundly
disappointed. Any summit attempt we might
make would now require a whole new
launch out of base camp. Morally, however,
we had had absolutely no choice but to
abort our summit try to help Thor and
Chantal get down the mountain. That’s why
I find it so hard to stomach all the accounts
in recent years—especially on Everest—of
climbers ignoring others in trouble for fear a
rescue effort would sabotage their own
summit bids.
The next night, the Russians and Chantal
celebrated their victory. Scott and I weren’t
invited, so we lay in our own tents listening
to their drunken cheers and toasts. That
was hard enough to take, but not nearly as
hard as the bombshell that exploded in the
morning.
Vlad gathered his “team” in the cooking tent
at breakfast. Then he announced that the
expedition was over! Everyone on his
permit would now have to go home. And as
if that edict weren’t severe enough, he
decided to insult the rest of us for good
measure. We Americans, he announced
witheringly, just didn’t climb fast enough.
We had wasted our time and weren’t willing
to push it.
I simply stared at Vlad. I was so angry, I
couldn’t get a single word out. I couldn’t
remember ever being so pissed off at a
fellow climber on a mountain. I couldn’t
believe that a so-called leader could be so
selfish. If we needed any further proof that
Vlad, in the end, was a complete jerk, he
had just provided it.
By August 7, Scott and I had been on the
mountain for nearly seven weeks. There
were five of us on the Russian permit who
still dearly wanted another crack at climbing
K2. And there was another team still at
base camp—Hall & Ball, with their Swedish
and Mexican teammates. After so much
effort, I wasn’t about to give up just
because Vlad had told us to go home.
Chantal, of course, had ignored the whole
permit business after her Swiss team had
packed it in. She had climbed the mountain
illegally and had apparently gotten away
with it. That wasn’t my style, however; I’ve
always pretty much played by the rules.
And I knew that other climbers who had
tried to circumvent permit restrictions had
been banned from Pakistan by the Ministry
of Tourism.
Since our leader, Vlad, was leaving,
technically our expedition was over and all
of us had to leave as well. But, working with
Hall & Ball and our liaison officer, we
eventually cobbled together an
arrangement that allowed us to stay on the
mountain. Dan Mazur, one of our five
determined to give it another shot, became
the nominal leader of what was left of our
party.
Meanwhile, the weather refused to
cooperate. Day after day, we saw fierce
storms raking the upper slopes of the
mountain. Scott and I had left all our gear
at Camp III. But now we started to worry
that Camp IV, on the Shoulder, could have
been buried under new snow or destroyed
by the winds that we had seen scouring the
upper reaches of the mountain. Instead of
counting on the tents and gear left by
others at Camp IV, we’d have to pack up
Camp III and carry it up to the Shoulder.
We rested at base camp for four days. I
was preoccupied with logistics. On August
10, I wrote in my diary:
Scott & I have all of our own stuff @
CIII—tent, bags, fuel, stove, food. Last trip
up we ate like sparrows—granola for
breakfast, 2 power bars during the day &
soup for dinner. We gave up on hot drinks
because it took too much time to cook on
the Bleuet stove….
We could do it in 3 days if conditions were
right. If not deep snow. Base to CIII, to CIV,
to summit. Please give us some good
weather!
It wasn’t until August 11 that the weather
cleared. We all decided to head up the
mountain the next day. After all our waiting,
all our setbacks, all the interpersonal
conflicts, I was supermotivated. You can
see the tension in my very handwriting in
my diary, and in my use of exclamation
marks:
We are going to CIII tomorrow. Scott, me,
Gary & Rob will leave here at 2 A.M….
Many will follow. But most of the rest
haven’t even been above CII yet! Plus they
will carry O’s [bottled oxygen]. It’s gonna be
tough for ‘em.
GET PSYCHED!!
GO! GO! GO! GO!
On August 12, Scott and I and Hall & Ball
left base camp at 2:00 A.M., planning to
climb all the way to Camp III that day.
Several others had left the day before and
spent the night at Camp II, in hopes of
meeting up with us at CIII when we arrived.
In the lead all the way, I reached Camp III
at noon. I’d climbed those 7,500 feet in ten
hours—an hour faster than my great time
on August 3. Charley Mace, who had spent
the night at Camp II, arrived at 2:30 P.M.
Scott didn’t get in until 4:00. Hall & Ball and
the rest of their teammates were even
slower. From my diary:
Rob & Gary arrived totally fried-out &
hypothermic. Had to set up camp for ‘em &
give hot drinks. Mex’s & Swedes showed
between 7–8 P.M.! Not a lot of strength
here that’s for sure.
Beautiful clear evening. High hopes for
good weather tomorrow.
But as it turned out, the weather the next
morning was decidedly iffy, with lenticular
cloud caps covering all the major
peaks—almost always a sign of a coming
storm. None of us was sure what to do,
until Scott and I decided to head up to the
Shoulder. We didn’t get off until 9:30 A.M.
The others eventually followed us.
As part of my homework for K2, I had
studied all the things that had gone wrong
on previous expeditions on the Abruzzi
Ridge. In particular, I’d learned a sobering
lesson from the 1986 tragedy. On their
descent, a number of climbers that year
had been marooned on the Shoulder during
a long storm. One reason some of them
didn’t seize the lulls in the storm to head
down was that they were afraid of losing
the route. And the reason for that was that
they had not adequately wanded the
stretch from Camp III to Camp IV.
“Willow wands” are ordinary garden stakes
painted green, with little red ribbons
attached to one end. On the way up, if you
plant a wand in the snow every hundred
feet or so, you’re marking the route so that
you can find it even in a whiteout on the
way down. I’d been trained on Rainier and
Denali always to wand a route.
Thus I’d been stunned to learn that the
climbers marooned on the Shoulder in
1986 simply had not brought enough willow
wands to mark the route on the featureless
white expanse below Camp IV. On a nice
sunny day, it’s hard to imagine the need for
those markers. But I’d always been taught
to plan for the worst and hope for the best.
Wanding doesn’t seem to be a European
thing—it’s not quite chic to be seen lugging
a pack with dozens of green sticks
protruding from the top flap. Even the
Russians on our trip had not bothered to
wand the route above Camp III.
Now, on the way up from Camp III to Camp
IV, I placed wands at regular intervals. I
knew that this stretch was the most likely
place for us to get lost on the way down. As
I climbed, I kept repeating to myself,
“Remember ‘86!” It wasn’t easy, since we
had lost a bunch of wands when the tents
were buried. In the end, as I began to run
out, I had to break many of the wands in
half and plant them short to eke out our
supply. We had even scrounged tent poles
from broken tents at Camp III to use as
wands. Several days later, those markers
would save our asses.
Scott and I reached Camp IV at 2:00 P.M.
Once again the others straggled in hours
later, some as late as 8:00 P.M. I’d
deliberately placed our campsite as high on
the Shoulder as was feasible, to shorten
the climb on summit day. Now we all
settled in to wait. In this incarnation, Camp
IV was a small cluster of freshly erected
and newly occupied tents. Charley Mace
was camped just below us. In various tents
were the members of Hall & Ball’s team:
Rob and Gary, two Swedish climbers, and
the three Mexicans.
Scott and I had also chosen to go
superlight. Our tent was not a regular twoman
model but a five-pound bivy tent. We
had only one sleeping bag to share
between the two of us. The idea was to
sleep in our down suits, with the bag
unzipped and draped over us like a blanket.
In the claustrophobic confines of our
cramped tent, we thought, this arrangement
should keep us warm enough.
Our only rope was the fifty-foot line I had
scavenged at Camp III. All of the rope we
had originally brought had either been fixed
in place or lost in the intervening storms.
That evening, August 13, Scott and I
planned to get up at 10:30 P.M. and be out
the door by midnight. But I knew better than
to count on perfect weather for the next
day. As I wrote in my diary—presciently, it
turned out—”Weather is so fickle on K2 the
only way to get good weather is to go high
& wait it out. That’s our plan. Hang out here
@ CIV until it looks good enough to go.”
The days that followed severely tried our
patience. Scott and I got up to check the
weather at 10:30 P.M., then again at
midnight, 3:30 A.M., and 5:30 A.M. Each
time we stuck our heads out the tent door,
we saw that it was blowing hard and
snowing—too nasty for a summit attempt.
We had decided that if we could not take
off by 5:30 A.M., it would be too late to get
to the summit and back with a margin of
safety. Once we’d made up our minds not
to go on August 14, we simply lay in our
cramped tent, trying to make the hours
pass. “Dozed all day,” I wrote in my diary.
“Didn’t eat shit. Try again tonight.”
During our time at Camp IV, we tried to yell
over the wind to let the others know our
plans. All of Hall & Ball’s team, including
the Swedes and the Mexicans, were now
intermittently using their bottled oxygen
even while they slept. That made for a cruel
trade-off: the longer they hung out at Camp
IV, the less oxygen they’d have left to go to
the summit with. We weren’t surprised,
then, in the middle of the day on August 14,
when two of the Mexicans, Ricardo Torres-
Nava and Adrian Benitez, decided to bail.
They were experienced climbers—both had
topped out on Everest—so we figured they
wouldn’t have any trouble getting down to
Camp III.
What happened on their descent we
learned about only secondhand, over the
radio from Dan Mazur and Jonathan Pratt,
two of our teammates who were still at
Camp III. The news shocked us badly, but
I’m disturbed, upon rereading my diary, to
see that I recorded it at the time with more
outrage than compassion:
Apparently they tried to do a ski pole rappel
(stupid!) @ the traverse & Adrian pulled it
out & fell 3000’ to near CII—he’s dead!
Idiots! Dan & Jonathan tried to get to him
but it was too dangerous.
Below the Shoulder, at about 25,500 feet,
there was a small ice step. Rather than
downclimb it, Ricardo and Adrian set up a
rappel. Despite having gotten up Everest,
the two Mexicans apparently weren’t very
technically skilled. As the anchor for their
rappel, they simply thrust a ski pole into the
slope. Even in the most desperate
situation, that would have been an
incredibly foolish thing to try. In fact, I’d
never before heard of anybody trying to
rappel off a ski pole. Ricardo got away with
it, but when Adrian put his weight on the
rope, the pole pulled. He never had a
chance to stop himself. Even though they
were sure he was dead, Jonathan and Dan
spent the better part of two days trying to
get to Adrian’s body; eventually they
decided that it was so hazardous, they
would be inviting another accident.
I’d guess now that the tone of my diary
entry reflected the weeks of tension and
frustration that had built up inside me by
mid-August. The accident showed how
close to the edge some of the climbers
were on this unforgiving mountain. Adrian
was a friendly and likable guy, and we were
all saddened by his death. But the accident
was entirely avoidable. He could have
easily faced in and downclimbed the steep
step where he fell; he didn’t need to rappel.
That’s where my anger came from. I’d been
on the mountain too long with other
climbers who weren’t even my teammates,
let alone my friends, and whose judgment
and technique I didn’t trust. What’s more,
the irritation in my diary must have been a
defense: I didn’t want this needless tragedy
to undermine in any way my own
determination to climb K2. Had it been
Scott or Charley who had died, more than
likely I would have given up my attempt.
August 15 came and went with no
improvement in the weather. That day,
having run out of bottled oxygen, the
Swedes bailed, and the third Mexican,
Hector Ponce de Leon, descended to
console his surviving teammate. So now
there were only five of us left at Camp IV:
Hall & Ball, Charley, Scott, and me. We had
to pass the hours resting and daydreaming.
My mind was filled with anxious thoughts:
How strong would I be during the final
ascent after surviving here for two or three
days? Would the weather finally break?
Could we get up to the summit and back
before nightfall, as no one this season had
yet done?
My diary entry that day is a testament to
uneasiness:
Tried again last night & no go. Still funky
weather. Barely eating. We either go up
tonight or bail down tomorrow….
Weather is OK. Not great. Cloudy, no wind,
poor visibility. We seem to be at the top
edge of clouds. Very anxious. Tonight we
must go up or go down tomorrow & start all
over—ugh! I want to get this over with! We
snooze all day like coon-hounds. Dreaming
of food—salad, beer, pizza.
That line about going down and starting all
over again, I now realize, was pure
rationalization. All five of us knew this was
going to be our last chance that summer to
climb K2.
On August 16, Scott and I were up at
midnight. It was still cloudy, but calm, so we
decided to go for it. Breakfast was a cup of
coffee apiece. Altitude deprives you of
hunger, and forcing yourself to eat can stir
up waves of nausea. It’s one of the
paradoxes of high-altitude climbing that
even though you are burning thousands of
calories each day, you simply cannot get
enough back into your system to balance
things out.
We had slept in our down suits, so it was
just a matter of putting on boots, overboots,
harnesses, mittens, hats, goggles, and
headlamps. Ice that had coated the inside
walls of our confining tent showered us as
we tried not to elbow each other. Finally we
were out the door. We strapped on our
crampons and were moving by 1:30 A.M.
Charley didn’t get off for another hour, and
Rob and Gary were even further behind.
I wasn’t carrying a pack, just two liter
bottles filled with a powdered energy drink;
in my chest pockets I’d stuck a couple of
Power Bars. I also carried a spare pair of
mittens, a camera, and extra headlamp
batteries. Scott and I were roped together
with our fifty-foot line, in anticipation of the
crevasses that we knew lay above.
The slope gradually steepened as we
headed up into the mouth of the Bottleneck.
We kicked steps in the firm snow, inclined
at a 45-degree angle. Following in our
tracks, Charley caught up to us in the
Bottleneck. During the whole expedition so
far, Scott and I had scarcely climbed with
Charley, but in that instant he became our
partner. We managed to tie in all three of
us on that fifty-foot rope, which was almost
absurd, yet roping up together gave us a
certain feeling of security.
Near the top of the Bottleneck, the snow
conditions worsened, alternating deep, soft
powder with a scary breakable crust. We
swapped leads often.
We’d been climbing for two hours before
we finally saw Rob and Gary’s headlamps
as they left Camp IV. Despite that late start,
and despite using supplemental oxygen,
they were moving very slowly. Was
something wrong?
At the top of the Bottleneck, we began the
leftward traverse, the crux of the whole
route. Vlad had fixed a 150-foot rope here
on August 1, and it was still in place—the
single fixed rope on the mountain above
Camp IV. It was anchored, with a pair of ice
screws, only at either end, so if you came
off in the middle of the traverse, you’d take
a horrendous yo-yo plunge before the
stretchy nylon rope would catch
you—assuming that neither of the anchors
pulled. All the same, we clipped in to the
rope and used it like a handrail, counting on
what climbers jokingly call “psychological”
protection.
The traverse was sketchy. The points of
our crampons barely gained purchase on
the downward-sloping slabs of rock that lay
just beneath the sugary snow. Falling was
not an option, but staying attached to the
face took all the concentration we could
muster.
By shortly after sunrise, we were past the
traverse and had started up the long
diagonal ramp that leads to the summit
snowfield. We were still more than a
thousand feet below the top, with some five
or six hours of climbing ahead of us, but we
knew that the ground only got easier
above. Things were looking really positive.
All morning, however, a sea of clouds
below us had been slowly but steadily
rising. At 7:00 A.M., the sea engulfed us. It
was still completely calm, and eerily
warm—so warm that I took off my hat. But
then it started to snow; the big, soft, fluffy
flakes quickly grew so thick that I started
inhaling them as I panted in the thin air. We
were still roped together, because even on
the summit snowfield there are crevasses
you could fall into. We continued to swap
leads as we plowed through the breakable
crust.
As we trudged slowly upward in silence, I
started calculating. Five hours to the
summit, three back down to here—what are
conditions going to be like eight hours from
now if it keeps snowing? It was then that
the knot started to form in my gut. As I later
wrote in my diary, I was wondering, “What
to do? The prudent thing is to turn back, but
we keep going. Stupid? Probably. This is
the worst part of climbing big peaks. Spend
tons of $ & time to get to this point & you’re
faced with this decision.”
Scott and Charley obviously weren’t going
through the same kind of agonizing
appraisal. When I finally stopped them and
asked, “Hey, what do you guys think?,”
Scott answered, “Whaddya mean?” and
Charlie seconded him: “We’re going up!”
So I kept heading upward, putting off my
decision from one half hour to the next. I
thought, Why are they comfortable with this
and I’m not? Am I a sissy? Do I worry too
much? Am I too conservative? All that
ambivalence, all that self-questioning just
ate away at me, and the knot in my gut
grew heavier.
As we got closer to the summit and the
falling snow showed no signs of letting up, I
knew I was making the greatest mistake of
my climbing life. And yet I kept going.
During the seventeen years since K2, I’ve
thought long and hard about why I didn’t
turn around on August 16, 1992. There was
certainly a voice in my head taunting me:
What are other people going to say if I go
down while Scott and Charley make the
summit? Yet today I can honestly state that
my partners’ eagerness to push ahead was
not what swayed me. It was, instead, my
perverse inability to make a decision. In my
head at the time, a broken record was
playing: I wish I didn’t have to make this
decision right now. This is the worst
decision in the world.
What happened to me in 2002 on
Annapurna gave me much-needed clarity
about what had gone on a decade earlier
on K2. On May 14 of that year, J.-C.
Lafaille and Alberto In'urrategi completed an
exposed and dangerous snow-and-ice
traverse under a tower called the Roc Noir,
then began climbing the steep face to
regain the crest of the east ridge. Coming
along a little behind the lead pair, Veikka
Gustafsson and I reached the traverse at
7:30 A.M. I started to lead across, but I
realized at once that the slope was loaded
with snow ready to slide. All it might take to
trigger a fatal avalanche was somebody
kicking steps in the unstable surface.
J.-C., the most talented climber I had ever
paired up with, had led the traverse, but I
balked. He kept yelling down to us how
dangerous the conditions were—a fact that
was already obvious to me. Torn by
conflicting impulses, I remembered being in
a similar predicament in 1992. This time a
voice in my head warned me, Ed, don’t do
now what you did on K2. I turned back, and
without hesitation Veikka turned back with
me. J.-C. and Alberto pushed on to the
summit, but they had a true epic getting
down. It was only after they had reversed
the traverse under the Roc Noir that they,
as J.-C. would later write, “once more
entered the land of the living.”
That was the only time on my thirty
expeditions to 8,000ers that I ever turned
back while a partner went on. But I’ve
never second-guessed my decision. The
sense that I’d made the right choice helped
me congratulate J.-C. and Alberto on their
triumph with unalloyed joy and admiration. I
believed they had just pulled off one of the
most daring ascents in recent
mountaineering history. By 2002, I was
comfortable with the notion that someone
like J.-C. might tread a thinner line of
acceptable risk than I would.
On August 16, 1992, Scott, Charley, and I
broke free of the clouds just short of the
summit. We saw it shining in the sun ahead
of us. At noon, we stood on top, hugging
each other and gasping in the thin air. My
elation was genuine, but it was tempered
by a mounting anxiety as I stared at the
boiling black clouds below us. After only
thirty minutes on top, we headed down.
Almost immediately we plunged back into
that sea of clouds, which was now darker
and more ominous than ever. Soon we
were stumbling downward in a thick
whiteout. It was then that Scott, in the lead,
started to head off in the wrong direction,
toward the top of the unknown east face.
On the way up, I’d memorized even the
subtlest landmarks, and now I was able to
shout, “No, no, no! Wrong way, Scott!
Farther to the right!”
By the time we got to the ramp that led
down to the Bottleneck, the snow
conditions were appalling. Most of the drifts
were thigh-deep, and as I broke trail, I kept
knocking loose huge slabs that thundered
out of sight into the void below. By now, I
was convinced that we were going to die. I
kept telling myself that I’d probably just
made the last and most stupid mistake of
my life. That realization brought with it a
weird sense of calm: Well, you might as
well give it your best effort. You’ve got
nothing to lose now.
At last we reached the near end of the crux
traverse. There was no hope of reversing
the pitch in the footsteps we had kicked on
the way up—they were lost under layers of
deep new snow. Instead, one by one we
rappelled the fixed rope until we reached its
sagging midpoint, then jumared back up to
the farther anchor. From there, at the top of
the Bottleneck, we faced in and started to
kick steps downward. We were un-roped,
since we knew that if one guy fell here, the
rope would also pull the other two off.
Miraculously, none of the snow slabs broke
loose beneath our feet. We downclimbed
slowly, until at last the angle gentled out
where the summit pyramid meets the
Shoulder. By now, the whiteout was so
thick, we couldn’t see Camp IV. So we
spread out, three abreast, and clomped on
down, like searchers looking for clues in a
crime scene in the forest. When we got to
the top of the Shoulder, we started calling
out, hoping Rob and Gary could guide us
into camp. At last they heard us and
shouted back.
We reached the tents at 5:00 P.M. We’d
been climbing for almost sixteen hours.
I sat down in the snow outside our bivy
tent. At that moment, I felt no happiness
whatsoever at having climbed K2. Instead, I
felt only anger at myself. That very evening,
I wrote in my diary, “We’d pushed our luck
beyond the max. I hope I never do that
again! No summit is worth dying for. You
can always come back.”
K2 was not done messing with us. As we’d
reached Camp IV, I’d asked Rob, “What
happened to you guys?”
A stricken look had crossed his face.
“Gary’s pretty sick,” he’d said softly.
That morning, Rob and Gary had barely
gotten started when Gary collapsed with
severe breathing problems. It was all Rob
could do to get his partner back to camp.
Throughout the day, as he lay in the tent,
Gary’s condition steadily worsened.
Eventually we would conclude that he had
a bad case of pulmonary edema.
Exhausted though we were, Scott, Charley,
and I would now have to get a nearly
helpless climber down the mountain. It
would have been tempting to take a rest
day on August 17, but I knew better. I wrote
in my diary, “We gotta get outta here. Don’t
want to get trapped here & die like all those
people in ’86…. This mountain is gonna
kick our ass all the way down.”
In terms of avalanche danger, the
conditions were still terrible. Knowing there
might not be any tents still standing at the
camps below, I packed our bivy tent, and
we carried our sleeping bags with us. Tired
as we were from our summit climb the day
before, plowing through waist-deep snow
exhausted us even further. Adrenaline was
our fuel, and saving Gary’s life was our
motivation. Once we’d left the Shoulder, we
improvised a descending technique born of
desperation. I would try to kick a solid
stance in the snow, then belay Charley
down on our fifty-foot rope. Then the other
three would use the rope like a static hand
line, with me as the anchor. Finally, when
everybody was down, I’d face in and
descend without a belay. All the while, Gary
seemed only half-conscious.
Needless to say, this was incredibly slow
and tedious. After a while, however, we
found the uppermost willow wand. Now,
when I belayed Charley, he would sweep
back and forth at the end of the rope until
he found the next wand. It was here that
those humble green garden stakes saved
our lives. By 1:00 P.M., we had reached
Camp III. We wanted to push on down to
Camp II, and since there were fixed ropes
all the way from III to II, Scott, Charley, and
I decided to go ahead, break trail, and
prepare camp for Rob and Gary.
Rappelling the fixed lines was a lot easier
and safer than downclimbing the steep
slopes above Camp III. The three of us got
to Camp II at 5:00 P.M.; Gary and Rob
arrived three hours later. Weakened by his
illness, Gary had abandoned his pack,
containing all his gear, somewhere above,
so Scott and I gave him one of our sleeping
bags (we had left a second bag at Camp
II). Once again the two of us cuddled
underneath a single sleeping bag in a halfcollapsed
tent. It was a miserable night, but
knowing we were slowly descending into
richer air gave us strength and hope.
Each day after we’d summited, the weather
got worse and worse. This mountain just
did not want to let us go. It was almost as if
we now had to pay some sort of toll for
having stood on her summit. Had we not
had to help Gary get down the mountain,
we could have moved fast, but now we
were confronted with a moral responsibility
that none of us could ignore. We would all
go down together.
By the next morning, Gary was in really bad
shape. Only marginally aware of what was
going on, he pleaded with us to leave him
there to die. Scott yelled at him, “We’re not
leaving you! Get your shit together!”
It took six hours on August 18 to get Gary
down to Camp I, even though we now had
him breathing supplemental oxygen. He
was so weak that we had to unclip and
reclip his figure-eight device from each
fixed rope. The snow and wind pummeled
us relentlessly. At Camp I, Gary completely
collapsed. I quickly erected the bivy tent
Scott and I had spent our nights in at Camp
IV, then sat inside it as I cradled Gary in my
lap and monitored his symptoms. His
breathing was rapid and shallow, and he
was coughing up blood and green phlegm,
some of which splattered onto the tent
walls. “He looks 90 years old and ready to
die,” I wrote in my diary.
Blessedly, Jonathan Pratt and Dan Mazur
had climbed up to Camp I to help out. They
administered fresh oxygen to Gary, but it
didn’t do much good. He could no longer
stand, let alone climb down under his own
steam. Eventually the Swedes arrived to
lend a hand. Spurred on by the fear of
losing Gary, we pushed through the night,
wearing headlamps as we lowered and slid
our completely helpless partner down the
slopes below Camp I. We reached advance
base camp, at the foot of the Abruzzi
Ridge, only at midnight. From there the
Swedes and Mexicans took over, while
Scott, Charley, and I stumbled on down to
base camp, arriving at 3:00 A.M. We had
been on the move for twenty hours straight.
The next day, a helicopter picked up Rob
and Gary and flew them to Islamabad. Gary
slowly recovered, first in a Pakistani
hospital, then back home in New Zealand.
He had survived K2 by the skin of his teeth.
I don’t think I’ve ever been more physically
or emotionally exhausted in my life than
after that climb and descent. But finally I
could relax and begin to savor the joy of
accomplishment. “What an epic!” I wrote in
my diary on August 19. “But we’re done!
Alive! Summited! No frostbite! Saved 2
people!” Beneath those triumphant boasts,
however, I was still haunted by our summit
day. You made a big mistake up there, I
thought. You happened to get away with it.
During those reflective moments at base
camp, I made a solemn vow to
myself—one that, I’m happy to say, I stuck
to throughout the following thirteen years of
going after 8,000ers. The vow: Your
instincts are telling you something. Trust
them and listen to them.
Before K2, although we had never climbed
together, Scott and I thought we might have
found the perfect partnership. We were
already planning an expedition for the
summer of 1993 that might have been even
more ambitious than K2: a two-man, alpinestyle
assault on the huge Diamir Face of
Nanga Parbat.
Despite all the setbacks and animosities,
Scott and I got along great on K2. In all the
pages of my diary, though I tended to let fly
at other climbers on the mountain who
weren’t doing their jobs, there’s scarcely a
harsh word about Scott.
Yet Scott and I never climbed together
again. And that was my decision. We
simply had different styles. Scott was a
freewheeling, let-it-happen kind of guy. I
was more calculating. Ours, I realized, was
not an equal partnership in terms of
planning, decision making, and bearing the
burden of stress. And although we had
gotten along well, I could see that Scott and
I had different levels of risk we were willing
to take.
So when Nanga Parbat came up again, I
made some kind of excuse. And I politely
declined other invitations from Scott in the
following years. We stayed great friends,
but we never again shared a rope.
I don’t really regret that choice. But it
makes what happened in 1996 all the more
poignant. That spring, Scott and I were on
the south side of Everest, on different
teams: I was part of David Breashears’s
IMAX project, while Scott was leading his
Mountain Madness clients up the standard
route on the world’s highest mountain.
It was great to see my old buddy again. At
base camp, we spent some happy hours
just shooting the breeze and reliving K2.
Some evenings he would wander over to
my tent with a couple of bottles of beer, and
we would sit outside chatting. Scott
seemed to need someone who wasn’t on
his team to talk to about their interpersonal
dynamics. This was the first time he was
guiding a group of clients on Everest. For
the future of his Mountain Madness
business, it was a huge event. A successful
climb in 1996 would boost sign-ups for the
following years.
By early May, Scott had decided to join
forces with Rob Hall’s Adventure
Consultants team for their summit attempt.
This would mean a relatively large group
working its way along the serpentine
southeast ridge toward the summit. Scott
and Rob announced May 10 as their
summit day. Not wanting to be part of this
large assault team, our IMAX crew chose to
bide our time: we wanted the mountain to
ourselves when we tried to shoot our bigscreen
movie. Scott and I crossed paths on
the Lhotse Face as he headed up to the
South Col. I gave him a big hug and said,
“Have a great trip. Be safe.”
That whole spring, something wasn’t right
with Scott. He was sick much of the time,
and uncharacteristically weak. He probably
should have let his other guides take the
clients to the top, but Scott was so used to
being big and strong that it never occurred
to him not to summit himself. And he had
famously nicknamed the South Col route
the “Yellow Brick Road,” since he thought
he had its ascent down pat.
On May 10, Scott was dragging when he
got to the summit, the last member of his
team to top out. On the descent, he
collapsed at 27,300 feet. We think now that
he was probably suffering from cerebral
edema. Despite the strenuous efforts of
others to save him, Scott died there, curled
up on his icy ledge.
Twelve days later, when our IMAX team
went to the summit, I knew that I would
have to pass Scott’s body above the South
Col. And I knew that it would be an
emotionally wrenching task. So I saved my
last “visit” for the way down.
In midafternoon, I sat down next to Scott’s
body. His upper torso and head had been
covered by a pack, but he lay on his back
with a flexed knee sticking up into the air.
Scott’s wife had wanted me to try to
retrieve the wedding ring that he carried on
a cord around his neck, but I couldn’t bring
myself to do it.
Instead, I sat there in silence for long
minutes. I looked at his surroundings, then
back at the body of my friend. “Hey, Scott,”
I said, “how you doing?” The only answer
was the droning of the wind.
“What happened, man?”
In 2003, I climbed Broad Peak with J.-C.
Lafaille. As we sat basking on top, we
stared at the beautiful pyramid of K2, six
miles to the northwest. Just two years
earlier, J.-C. had had his own epic on K2.
His intention was to make a rapid solo
ascent of the Cesen route, the western
variant of the Abruzzi Ridge. But the
conditions were hideous. As J.-C. later
explained, “The snow had a bizarre, almost
dusty consistency. Above 22,000 feet, you
had the feeling of swimming in polystyrene,
or in polenta.”
Instead of soloing the route, J.-C. teamed
up with the great Tyrolean climber Hans
Kammerlander, a longtime partner of
Reinhold Messner, who had also been
eyeing a solo ascent. The two
superalpinists left base camp on July 20.
Only two days later, at 2:30 in the
afternoon, they embraced on the summit.
But the descent became a nightmare. Like
me in 1992, J.-C. was all but certain that an
avalanche would sweep Kammerlander
and himself off the mountain. That same
day, a Korean climber fell to his death from
the Abruzzi Ridge.
Now, on top of Broad Peak, as we stared at
K2, I said to J.-C., “Boy, I’m glad I don’t
have to climb that again!” A thin-lipped
smile seized his face. “Oui,” he answered, “
moi aussi.” Then, remembering my
ignorance of French, he added, “Yes. Me
too, I am very happy not to do it again!”
3
BREAKTHROUGH
People always wonder how K2 got its
name. The answer is, in one sense,
completely mundane, but in another, it’s an
object lesson in just how hard it is to find an
appropriate name for a great geographical
feature. Rising from the middle of the
Karakoram Range, K2 is guarded on all
sides by other towering mountains and by
major glaciers. It is much harder to see
from the lowlands than Mount Everest is.
It was the Great Trigonometrical Survey of
India, that indefatigable and classically
British mapping project, that “discovered”
both Everest and K2. The Everest story is
fairly well known. In 1849 three surveyors
trained a theodolite on a far distant summit
peeking over ridgelines in front of it. They
jotted down their data, then soullessly
named the summit Peak XV. It was not until
three years later that a Bengali
“computer”—a clerk whose job it was to
work out calculations—came rushing into
the office of India’s surveyor general to
announce that he had “discovered the
highest mountain in the world.”
Carrying the survey through hundreds of
stations all the way from the seacoast, the
computer, Radhanath Sikdar, had deduced
an altitude of 29,002 feet. This was an
amazingly accurate measurement: today,
the mountain’s official altitude is 29,035
feet above sea level. It took another
thirteen years, however, for the surveyor
general to discard the name Peak XV and
replace it with Mount Everest,
commemorating his predecessor, Sir
George Everest.
In 1856, another plucky field-worker for the
Great Trigonometrical Survey, Lieutenant
T. G. Montgomerie, dragged his heavy
theodolite to an altitude of 16,000 feet on a
mountain overlooking Srinagar, in Kashmir.
From that lofty vantage point, Montgomerie
gazed at the Karakoram, 130 miles to the
north. Taking fixes on the two most
prominent summits, he labeled them K1
and K2 (K was short for Karakoram). K1 is
known today as Masherbrum, a handsome
25,660-foot mountain first climbed by
Americans in 1960. Two years after
Montgomerie took his readings, the altitude
of K2 was calculated to be 28,287
feet—also an astoundingly accurate
measurement, only 36 feet in excess of its
official altitude today. Several other peaks
labeled in the K series still retain their
original names, including the beautiful and
formidable 22,744-foot tower K7.
I’m so used to calling the world’s highest
mountain Everest that it’s hard for me to
stop and think whether it’s a good name or
not. Everest has been the official name for
so long that it just seems to fit. But long
before the British surveyed it, the great
peak was known to Tibetan natives as
Chomolungma. (That name first appears in
print on a 1733 French map of Tibet, drawn
after a group of monks returned from a
quarter century of work in Lhasa to report
their findings.) It’s a great name, full of the
reverence Tibetans feel for the mountain: it
translates to “Goddess Mother of the
World.” There have been efforts over the
years to change the official name, or simply
to use Chomolungma unofficially rather
than Everest, in the same way that climbers
now universally refer to Mount McKinley as
Denali, even though McKinley is still the
official name. But that revisionism hasn’t
taken hold on Everest. Only the Chinese
regularly call the mountain Chomolungma.
After the survey discovered the great height
of K2, there was a sincere effort to find a
native name for the mountain. Montgomerie
himself wrote, “Every endeavour will be
made to find a local name if it has one.”
Somebody learned that the Balti people
living south of the Karakoram called K2
Chogori. The problem is, Chogori means
simply “Great Mountain.” As K2 historian
Jim Curran sardonically puts it, “Chogori …
is likely to have been the sort of bemused
answer given to the question ‘What’s that
called?’”
Instead, through the rest of the nineteenth
century a number of names honoring
British pooh-bahs were tried out. None of
them came close to sticking, except Mount
Godwin Austen, the name honoring another
tireless worker for the Great
Trigonometrical Survey, Lieutenant Henry
Haversham Godwin-Austen, who was one
of the first Westerners to explore the
Baltoro Glacier. Thank God that name
never won the day! (The branch of the
Baltoro that sweeps under the Abruzzi
Ridge, however, is officially named the
Godwin Austen Glacier.)
The fact is, K2 turns out to be a memorable
name. There is no better defense of it than
the one mounted by Fosco Maraini, whose
1959 chronicle of the first ascent of
Gasherbrum IV, Karakoram, is one of the
best expedition books ever written. Maraini
argued,
K2 may owe its origin to chance, but it is a
name in itself, and one of striking
originality. Sibylline, magical, with a slight
touch of fantasy. A short name but one that
is pure and peremptory, so charged with
evocation that it threatens to break through
its bleak syllabic bonds. And at the same
time a name instinct with mystery and
suggestion: a name that scraps race,
religion, history and past. No country claims
it, no latitudes and longitudes and
geography, no dictionary words. No, just
the bare bones of a name, all rock and ice
and storm and abyss. It makes no attempt
to sound human. It is atoms and stars.
Remote from civilization though K2 is, the
first attempt to climb it came as early as
1902. That’s nineteen years before the first
attempt on Everest. The main reason for
this discrepancy is that throughout the
nineteenth century and the beginning of the
twentieth, both Tibet and Nepal were
virtually closed to foreigners, whereas K2
lay in what was then British India.
The 1902 expedition was the joint
brainchild of Oscar Eckenstein, a superb
German climber who had immigrated to
Britain, and Aleister Crowley, one of the
strangest men ever to become a
mountaineer. Crowley would later grow
famous as “the Beast 666”—his own
nickname for his identification of himself
with the devil. He was a magician, a drug
cultist, an advocate of complete sexual
freedom, a poet, an egomaniac—and a
climber. In the early 1970s, his
autobiography, The Confessions of Aleister
Crowley, first published in 1929, became a
hippie cult classic.
Crowley unabashedly referred to himself as
the best rock climber in Britain. In reality,
he wasn’t even in the same league as
George Leigh Mallory and several other
contemporaries. But Crowley and
Eckenstein’s assault on K2 was conceived
as a wildly audacious project. Before they
left England, the two men signed a
memorandum of agreement in which they
pledged “that they should together climb a
mountain higher than any previously
ascended by man.”
The team was rounded out with a twentytwo-
year-old Englishman, a former Swiss
ex-army doctor, and two Austrians. In his
Confessions, Crowley is downright
withering about these four companions.
The Englishman “knew practically nothing
of mountains, but he had common sense
enough to do what Eckenstein told him;”
the Swiss “knew as little of mountains as he
did of medicine.” But Crowley’s contempt
rises to a fever pitch when he writes about
the Austrians, Pfannl and Wessely. Pfannl
was “reputed the best rock climber in
Austria,” but during the expedition, he “went
actually mad,” while Wessely “brooded on
food to the point of stealing it.” In
retrospect, Crowley decided, “we should
have done better to take none of the
foreigners.” (Needless to say, Crowley’s
memoir is a startling exception to the
traditional narrative convention of keeping
all the expedition’s dirty laundry out of
sight.)
With the team only in Askole, the last
village before the Baltoro Glacier, Pfannl
and Wessely (if Crowley can be believed)
asked their leaders if they could put three
days’ provisions in their rucksacks and go
off and climb K2! Even today, Askole is a
good six-or seven-day march away from
base camp. In Confessions, Crowley
ridicules the naivete of the Austrians: “It is
really astonishing that so many days of
travel had taught them nothing about the
scale of the mountains.”
Yet the Austrians’ mistake was one
commonly made by Europeans during the
early attempts on the great peaks of the
Himalaya and the Karakoram. In 1895, A.
F. Mummery, the finest British climber of
his generation, organized the first
expedition to Nanga Parbat. Mummery had
put up many bold routes in the Alps and
Caucasus, but he didn’t seem to recognize
that Nanga Parbat was of a different order
of magnitude from, say, the Matterhorn. He
set off to reconnoiter the lower slopes of
the mountain so casually that he took with
him only two porters, rather than any British
teammates. None of the three men was
ever seen again.
The Europeans dimly recognized that the
sheer altitude of the world’s highest peaks
would present problems unknown in the
Alps. But they developed some pretty
wacky theories about how to deal with thin
air. Norman Collie, Mummery’s teammate
on Nanga Parbat and a mentor to Crowley,
was convinced that “the only chance of
getting up a big mountain was to rush it.”
On the K2 expedition, Crowley
wholeheartedly endorsed this absurd
formula. “The only thing to do,” he wrote, “is
to lay in a stock of energy, get rid of all your
fat at the exact moment when you have a
chance to climb a mountain, and jump back
out of its reach, so to speak, before it can
take its revenge.”
On the Baltoro, after many days, the
expedition established a camp right at the
base of what would come to be called the
Abruzzi Ridge. Crowley recognized that
spur as a plausible route, but now it was his
turn radically to underestimate the scale
and difficulty of K2. After studying the
slopes above him for a full day, he
concluded, as he later wrote, “that while the
south face, perhaps possible theoretically,
meant a complicated climb with no half-way
house, there should be no difficulty in
walking up the snow slopes on the eastsouth-
east to the snowy shoulder below the
final rock pyramid.”
Whew! The south face, on which Reinhold
Messner would later identify the fiendish
but beautiful route he called the “Magic
Line,” would not be climbed until 1986. And
it would be another thirty-six years after
Crowley camped at the base of his “eastsouth-
east” route that the first climbers
pushed the Abruzzi Ridge as far as the
Shoulder, at 26,000 feet. When they did so,
it was not by “walking,” but only by virtue of
some of the hardest climbing yet performed
at such an altitude anywhere in the world.
(Crowley’s very vocabulary betrays his
dependency on the Alps as reference point:
“no half-way house” sounds like a lament
for the absence of a good hut in the
Bernese Oberland, not for the lack of a
decent tent site in the Karakoram.)
The Confessions reads like a 1,020-page Itold-
you-so. On every conceivable matter,
all the experts turn out to be wrong, while
Crowley is proved right. But it does seem
that on K2, Crowley wanted to attack his
east-south-east spur, only to be overruled
by Eckenstein, who insisted on turning the
team’s efforts to the long and complicated
northeast ridge. During the next few days,
the climbers wore themselves out simply
getting to the col they named “Windy Gap.”
The high point reached (by the supposedly
worthless Pfannl and Wessely) was
estimated at 21,000 feet. But the party
made no dent in the northeast ridge, a
route that would not be climbed until 1978,
when my friend Jim Wickwire and his three
American teammates finally solved it.
The first attempt on the Abruzzi Ridge
came seven years after the Crowley-
Eckenstein expedition. It was led,
appropriately enough, by Luigi Amedeo di
Savoia-Aosta, the Duke of the Abruzzi.
Though a titled nobleman and grandson of
the first king of Italy, the duke became one
of the greatest explorers of his era. Before
turning his attention to K2, he had led
brilliantly successful expeditions to Mount
Saint Elias (at 18,008 feet the fourthhighest
mountain in North America) in 1897
and to the unknown Ruwenzori Mountains
of Africa in 1906, where he made the first
ascents of all the highest peaks. He had
also spearheaded an ambitious dogsled
attempt on the north pole in 1900, which
reached a farthest north of 86°34’, breaking
the record of the great Norwegian explorer
Fridtjof Nansen by twenty-three miles.
The style of Abruzzi’s expeditions mixed
opulence with efficiency. On Saint Elias, for
instance, the party was made up of six
Italian “amateurs” (gentleman climbers like
the duke), four professional guides from
Aosta, and ten porters hired in Seattle. To
avoid the indignity of sleeping in direct
contact with the ground, the amateurs
brought along brass bedsteads, which the
porters hauled fifty-five miles from the
Pacific Coast to base camp. Yet high on
the mountain, the team went light and fast.
On July 31, 1897, all ten climbers reached
the summit together. Mount McKinley, the
highest peak in North America, would not
be climbed for another sixteen years.
For K2, the Duke of the Abruzzi’s party
included Filippo de Filippi, the expedition
doctor, who would write the now classic
account of the expedition, and four
professional guides and three porters from
Courmayeur, the Italian village nestled
under Mont Blanc on the south side.
Rounding out the team was Vittorio Sella,
the finest mountain photographer of his day
and one of the greatest ever. Laboriously
exposing large-format glass plates and
developing them in the field, Sella brought
back portraits of previously unknown
mountains so glorious they would inspire
several generations of climbers. These
were published in the lavish folio volumes
that the duke produced after each of his
expeditions.
Nowhere in the world did Sella find himself
enclosed by such a dazzling panorama as
when the 1909 team marched slowly east
up the Baltoro Glacier. One by one, the
peaks filed by on either side—Uli Biaho, the
Cathedrals, the Trango Towers, Paiju
Peak, Mustagh Tower, Chogolisa,
Masherbrum, and Gasherbrum IV. Though
they’re all lower than 8,000 meters, these
technically severe mountains would
demand the best efforts of some of the
world’s top climbers from the late 1950s,
through the 1980s, and they continue to
lure cutting-edge alpinists today.
Long before I went to K2, I’d seen Sella’s
photos of those mountains. So as Scott and
I hiked up the Baltoro Glacier in 1992, I
experienced a feeling of deja vu. Even so, I
had my socks knocked off by the sheer
majesty of those peaks. There’s no
approach to a high mountain anywhere
else in the world that compares. By the
time I’d finished my quest for the 8,000ers,
I’d hiked up the Baltoro four times, since
the approach to Broad Peak, Gasherbrum
I, and Gasherbrum II is the same as the
trek in to K2. Yet even on my last Baltoro
march in 2003, I was still struck with
wonder as I passed beneath those graceful
and legendary mountains.
In 1909, the duke’s party turned north at
the glacier junction called Concordia. On
May 27—much earlier than most later
parties would attack the mountain—they
pitched a base camp at the foot of the
mountain’s southeast spur. To the duke,
unlike Aleister Crowley, that steep and
complicated arete rising almost 9,000 feet
to the Shoulder looked like anything but a
walk-up. So Abruzzi postponed his attempt,
while the team made a quick foray toward
the northeast ridge, the route attempted by
the Eckenstein-Crowley party in 1902. The
guides, however, knew a hopeless route
when they saw one, and quickly turned
back.
On May 29, the duke, five of the
Courmayeur men, and a number of Balti
porters started up the southeast spur. By
June 1, they had managed to establish a
camp at 18,250 feet, only some 800 feet
above the base of the ridge. There,
however, the Balti porters saw falling rocks
careening down from above and refused to
carry any farther. (I can sympathize with
those poor guys. They’d never been on
terrain like this before in their lives. And the
lower slopes on the Abruzzi Ridge feel
constantly threatened by falling debris.
Even on easy ground, you’re always
looking up to see if anything is coming your
way.)
During the next two days, some of the
Courmayeur men, led by the father-andson
guides Joseph and Laurent Petigax,
pushed higher. On the harder passages,
they left heavy hemp ropes in place—the
first fixed ropes ever strung on K2. But it
became obvious to the Petigaxes that
some of the pitches would be too hard for
the Balti porters, even if they could be
talked into giving it a go. Without porters,
there was no hope of mounting a logistical
pyramid toward the summit.
Discouraged, the guides turned back. At
the lower camp, the duke accepted their
judgment and called off the attempt. The
highest point reached by the Petigaxes is
uncertain, but it was probably around
21,000 feet. (Incidentally, the Italians
retrieved their fixed ropes as they
descended—something virtually no
subsequent expeditions would ever do.)
Still, the Duke of the Abruzzi was not ready
to give up on K2. Now he turned his team
toward a reconnaissance of the unexplored
western reaches of the mountain.
Ascending the Savoia Glacier (which he
named after his home stomping grounds in
Italy), he tried to gain the high col from
which the northwest ridge rises. After a
monumental twelve-hour push of step
cutting in hard ice and snow, the team
reached the col, which they named Savoia
Pass, at an altitude they measured at
21,870 feet. But there they found
themselves cut off from the northwest ridge
by a dangerously corniced crest. Once
more, K2 turned the duke back. The
mountain would not be climbed from this
side until 1991.
The team still had several weeks’ worth of
supplies stockpiled on the Baltoro. So the
duke turned his attention to several lesser
peaks. On Chogolisa, he and three of the
Courmayeur guides reached an altitude
that they measured at 24,275 feet. Faced
with dangerous cornices and crevasses,
they retreated only 850 feet short of the
summit. Still, they had achieved a new
record: nobody in the world had ever
climbed so high. The record would stand
for thirteen years, until the second British
expedition to Everest bettered it in 1922.
The duke had perhaps been spoiled by his
blithe successes on Saint Elias and the
Ruwenzori. It came as a rude rebuff to him
to be turned back on K2 nearly 6,400 feet
below the summit. And so, once back in
Italy, one of the strongest mountaineers in
the world declared that he believed K2
would never be climbed.
That malediction took its toll. K2 would not
be attempted again for twenty-nine years.
In the meantime, seven expeditions did
battle with Mount Everest, and six different
men turned back (or, in Mallory and Irvine’s
case, disappeared) above 28,000 feet,
within a tantalizing thousand feet of the
summit.
By 1938 on K2, no one had succeeded in
climbing above 21,870 feet. On neither the
1902 nor the 1909 expedition had anyone
really come to grips with the challenge. All
the mountain’s ultimate defenses remained
unknown.
Beginning in the mid-1930s, the American
Alpine Club (AAC) repeatedly petitioned the
government of Kashmir for a permit for a
K2 expedition. In those days, climbing in
America lagged far behind the standards
set by British, French, German, Italian,
Swiss, and Austrian climbers. But in 1936,
four young American climbers, all of them
graduates of Harvard, joined up with four
more senior (and more famous) Brits to
make the first ascent of Nanda Devi, a
beautiful and difficult 25,643-foot mountain
in northern India. At the time, it was the
highest summit reached anywhere in the
world—a record that would stand for
another fourteen years, until the French
climbed Annapurna in 1950.
Out of the party of eight, only two—the
Englishmen H. W. Tilman and Noel
Odell—reached the summit. The strongest
American was Charlie Houston, a twentytwo-
year-old graduate student at the
Columbia University College of Physicians
and Surgeons. Despite his youth, Houston
had climbed in the Alps as a teenager and
was already the veteran of two major
Alaskan expeditions, including the first
ascent of Mount Foraker, the secondhighest
peak in the Alaska Range. Houston
was chosen for the summit party on Nanda
Devi, but the night before the assault he
came down with a terrible case of food
poisoning, and Tilman took his place.
When permission for K2 finally came
through, in 1937, the AAC offered the
leadership of the expedition to Fritz
Wiessner, a German-American from
Dresden who had immigrated to the States
in 1929 and gained citizenship in 1935.
Wiessner was without a doubt the finest
American climber of his day. After putting
up new routes on several of the hardest
faces in the Alps, he had bagged some of
the great prizes in North America, including
the first ascent of Mount Waddington, the
rugged and intricate peak that is the
highest summit in the stormy Coast Range
of British Columbia, which had defeated
sixteen previous attempts. Wiessner was
also the only American with experience on
an 8,000-meter peak, as he had served on
the 1932 German expedition to Nanga
Parbat, where he was one of three climbers
to reach a high point of 23,000 feet.
Wiessner ran his own successful chemistry
business in Vermont, specializing in the
manufacture of ski wax. By the time the
AAC got permission for K2, he was too
bogged down in business obligations to go
to the Karakoram the next summer, so he
recommended that the expedition be turned
over to Charlie Houston. Oddly enough,
that magnanimous referral would be the
spark for a lifelong, often bitter antipathy
between Houston and Wiessner.
Houston leapt at the chance to lead the
expedition. But from the start, he harbored
the suspicion that Wiessner had a hidden
agenda. The permit the AAC had obtained
was good for two years; if the 1938
expedition failed to get up K2, Americans
could organize another crack at the
mountain for 1939.
Houston’s first choice for the team was Bob
Bates, a good friend of his from Harvard,
himself a veteran of two Alaskan
expeditions. In February 1938, Bates wrote
a letter to another Harvard crony in which
he voiced the fears he and Houston already
entertained: “Weissner’s [sic] idea, I
suppose, is to have us do the
reconnaissance + possibly the dirty work +
then go in next year and profit by our
mistakes. This is pretty surely it, but keep it
to yourself.”
Houston put together a strong team.
Besides Bates, the climbers included Bill
House, Wiessner’s partner on the
Waddington first ascent; Richard Burdsall,
who had reached the summit of the remote
and lofty Minya Konka in western China in
1932; and Paul Petzoldt. Houston, Bates,
Burdsall, and House were all easterners
and Ivy League graduates—the first three
had gone to Harvard, House to Yale.
Petzoldt not only hadn’t gone to college, he
was a cowboy from Wyoming. But he was
also one of the strongest climbers in the
country, having pioneered some of the
hardest routes in the Tetons, where he
worked part-time as a guide. In terms of
rock-climbing skills, Petzoldt was way
ahead of his eastern teammates.
The sixth member of the party, invited from
afar, was Captain Norman Streatfeild, a
British officer living in India who had
already been on numerous hunting,
mapping, and climbing trips to the
Karakoram. Streatfeild was not the
mountaineering equal of the five
Americans, but he would prove invaluable
in terms of logistics and dealing with native
porters.
When I was still a teenager, long before I’d
climbed any peaks myself, I’d read Houston
and Bates’s classic K2: The Savage
Mountain, about the 1953 expedition. I’d
loved the book, because it told the story of
how adversity transformed a team into an
ideal brotherhood; along with Annapurna,
K2: The Savage Mountain had a lot to do
with turning me into a mountaineer. But it
was not until Scott and I started preparing
for our own K2 adventure in 1992 that I
read the book about the earlier American
expedition.
Five Miles High is a collaborative effort: five
of its chapters were written by Bates, five
by Houston, four by House, three by
Burdsall—and none by Petzoldt. It’s a
delightful book, the kind of tale that makes
you nostalgic for a vanished era of
exploration. It also subscribes firmly to the
tradition of keeping the expedition’s dirty
laundry far from the eyes of the public.
There are tongue-in-cheek gibes about
certain members’ habits and foibles (for
example, about how much Petzoldt liked to
eat), but you’d hardly know that a harsh
word or dispute occurred within the team.
And there is not the slightest hint of the
Wiessner-Houston tension that would
explode inside the AAC after 1939.
Houston admits in the first chapter that the
Duke of the Abruzzi’s dark prediction still
hung over the mountain. “So formidable are
the few approaches to its summit,” he
writes, “that many climbers have felt the
ascent to be impossible.” Houston also
baldly declares that the 1938 expedition
was conceived as a reconnaissance:
Could we determine which route offered
most possibility of success, perhaps a later
expedition, unhampered by the need of
reconnoitering the mountain, might hope to
reach the top. Ours then was to be a
preliminary attack whose main plan was to
find a way for a later party.
But then he coyly closes the chapter:
We were to examine three main ridges,
separated by miles of glacier travel, and to
decide which of the three would be most
likely to furnish a route to the summit.
Finally, given time, weather, and the smile
of fortune, we were to try to reach that
distant point.
All through the winter and spring before the
expedition, the climbers ordered gear and
tested food supplies. When you read about
the provisions those men took to K2 in
1938, you realize they were closer not only
in time but in style to the great Arctic and
Antarctic expeditions of the turn of the
twentieth century than to our present-day
mountaineering jaunts. For instance, the
‘38 climbers brought along fifty pounds of
pemmican made in Denmark. Almost
nobody eats pemmican anymore, but it was
the staple of nineteenth-century explorers.
Pemmican is a gooey mixture of dried
meat, animal fat, sugar, rice, and raisins. It
keeps well in the cold, and it’s very high in
calories. I have to confess, though, that I’ve
never had a single bite of the stuff. We
know now that while pemmican may be
great in the Arctic or the Antarctic, it’s way
too fatty to digest at high altitudes.
The 1938 team tried out dozens of kinds of
biscuits and hard bread. They tested them
by dropping them out of a second-floor
window and by leaving them out in the rain
overnight. They finally chose one brand of
biscuit because, as Bates wrote, it “tasted
good and resisted moisture, yet needed no
sledge hammer to break it.” Bates’s team
also swore by some of the first dried
vegetables and fruits available, all of them
produced by what their makers called a
“secret process.” The ‘38 team’s cereals
included Cream of Wheat and Maltex. Like
all expeditions of their time, the team
considered it absolutely essential to bring
along large quantities of Klim (“milk” spelled
backward)—powdered whole milk, which is
almost impossible to find in a market
nowadays. On all my expeditions, coffee
has been a vital base camp drink. The
1938 climbers brought tea instead (I do
drink sweet, milky tea up high), because
they considered coffee too much of a
nuisance to brew in the field.
When I look over that K2 food list, I’m
struck by how bulky and heavy their
provisions were. But then I have to remind
myself that they were outfitting in an age
long before prepackaged dried foods came
on the market, or Power Bars or Pop-Tarts,
or instant soups, or tubes of high-energy
gel. The kinds of lightweight, easy-to-fix
meals we relied on in 1992 simply weren’t
available in 1938. On the other hand, those
guys had luxuries we never dreamed of. In
Askole, for example, they hired a hefty
porter with a huge, straw-lined wicker
basket for a backpack, in which he
managed to carry twenty dozen fresh eggs
to base camp without breaking them!
There’s the same historical divide when it
comes to equipment. Boots, for instance: in
1938, climbers who wanted the best
mountaineering footwear available wore
relatively thin leather boots, their soles
reinforced with hobnails—little metal cleats
affixed to the undersurface. The nails gave
you better purchase on ice and snow, but
they were a real liability on rock slabs,
because your feet tended to skitter off their
holds. What’s more, at altitude the hobnails
conducted cold straight to your feet,
contributing directly to the risk of frostbite
all early climbers faced in the Himalaya. It
would be decades before Vibram rubber
soles got invented, not to mention double
boots—especially the kind of combination
plastic outer shell and foam inner I wore on
most of my 8,000-ers. The 1938 team
members ordered custom-made boots from
England, and they were so finicky that each
man chose the precise pattern of hobnails
with which his soles would be studded.
Climbing ropes, at that time, were still
made out of hemp or manila. Nylon ropes,
which are many times stronger and have a
stretchiness that absorbs much of the
impact of a fall, were still nearly a decade in
the future. The ice axes of the day were
three to four feet long and had shafts of
hickory or ash, with a straight metal pick
and an opposing adze for a handle. They
looked more like Victorian alpenstocks
(glorified walking sticks) than the short,
fanged chrome-molybdenum ice tools we
used in 1992.
In 1938, the climbers boxed and sealed all
their gear and food and sent it ahead by
steamer. On April 14, they sailed from New
York, bound first for Europe, then for
Bombay.
From the start of the trip, there was a
cultural gulf between Petzoldt and his
teammates. You won’t find the faintest hint
of it in Five Miles High, but the oral
traditions of mountaineering have
preserved anecdotes about it, and glimpses
pop up in the latter-day biographies of
Petzoldt and Houston.
Petzoldt was too poor to afford the
expedition. Instead, Farnie Loomis—a wellto-
do Harvard grad and a member of the
Nanda Devi expedition who had climbed
with Petzoldt in the Tetons and had
recommended him to Houston—paid his
way. (Petzoldt was, you might say, the first
sponsored climber!) In the perverse logic of
the day, that tarred the Wyoming cowboy
with a certain unworthiness in the eyes of
his Ivy League teammates. And Petzoldt’s
profession as a guide, just as perversely,
could be seen as a detriment on an
expedition, not as an asset.
Petzoldt’s first biographer was his wife,
Patricia, who thus may not be an impartial
witness. But in 1953, in On Top of the
World, she wrote,
Later Paul discovered that there had been
some doubts expressed in the [American
Alpine] Club as to whether he would be
able to adjust himself socially to the rest of
the party. The fact that he was a
professional, a guide, had been
questioned; and then of course he was a
Westerner and, although he was known to
have had some education, he had not
attended an Ivy League college.
Houston’s biographer Bernadette
McDonald insisted in 2007 that Charlie
once called Petzoldt “a blue collar guide.”
That sense of a social gulf may lie behind
the fact that Petzoldt was not asked to write
any of the chapters of Five Miles High.
In his turn, Petzoldt referred to Bates and
Houston, behind their backs, as “two
Eastern nabobs.” According to McDonald,
Petzoldt thought that, far from being
sneered at as a professional guide, he
ought to be paid an extra salary for bringing
his expertise to his “amateur” teammates.
Just as serious was the gulf between
Petzoldt and the easterners about the kinds
of climbing hardware necessary to attempt
K2. Houston and Bates had a British
disdain for “ironmongery”—the pitons,
carabiners, and direct-aid ladders with
which European climbers had recently
transformed alpinism. Among the
expedition supplies, they had included at
most ten pitons. Petzoldt, on the other
hand, wholeheartedly embraced the new
technical gear, without which he could not
have forged his Teton routes. On
shipboard, a heated argument broke out
over this question, but Petzoldt was
outnumbered.
Scandalized by his teammates’ backward
attitude, however, Petzoldt sneaked off
during a stop in Paris on the way to India
and used his last dollars to buy fifty pitons
at the shop of the great French climber
Pierre Allain. (Allain, incidentally, had been
a member of the French expedition to
Gasherbrum I just two years earlier.)
Petzoldt then smuggled the hardware into
the boxes of expedition gear. On K2, of
course, the pitons proved invaluable.
By May 9, the team had reached
Rawalpindi. In 1992, to get from there to
K2, Scott and the trekkers on his permit
took a one-hour flight to Skardu. That’s the
normal procedure, but the flight was
overbooked, and I couldn’t afford it anyway,
so I ended up scrounging rides in two
antiquated vehicles—a journey that I later
called “the 26-hour ride from hell.” On the
first bus, a pregnant Pakistani woman
vomited out the window at regular intervals.
I barely kept from tossing my own cookies.
By the time I got to Skardu, I was covered
with soot, dirt, and sweat.
After a few days, we bummed a ride on a
jeep to cover the last eighty miles to
Askole. It was only in Askole that we would
actually start hiking, so it seemed that the
expedition really began there. The overland
journey from Skardu amounted to little
more than an ordeal by bouncing truck,
shared by a tightly packed band of sweaty
fellow passengers. We glimpsed some
amazing scenery along the way, but most
of the time we were too busy hanging on or
too exhausted to care.
In 1938, there was no road from Rawalpindi
to Skardu, and there certainly wasn’t an
airplane flight. Instead, Houston’s team
drove to Srinagar, then hiked all the way
not only to Skardu but to Askole, crossing
high foothills by the legendary trade route
over the Zoji La. The Duke of the Abruzzi
had made the same journey in 1909, as
had Crowley and Eckenstein in 1902. The
total distance from Srinagar to Askole is
320 miles, and from there to base camp is
another 40. So in 1938, the climbers had to
trek some 360 miles just to get to K2. It
took them a month to the day.
This, I’ve always thought, is perhaps the
way our modern-day expeditions differ
most profoundly from the classic voyages
of the first half of the twentieth century. For
many climbers today, the hike in is
essentially a hassle, a necessary evil in the
process of coming to grips with an 8,000er.
On the other hand, I like approach
marches. Even though the ones we
perform today are far shorter than the
marathon overland journeys of the 1920s
and ‘30s, those hikes give me a chance to
acclimate to the wilderness and to take in
the local culture. The trek to K2 from
Askole—only one-sixth as long as the
approach the 1938 expedition made—is
wild, harsh, and dusty. There are no other
villages after Askole, but the landscape is
starkly beautiful.
My most memorable trek in to an 8,000er
was the approach to Manaslu in 1999. My
only companions were Veikka Gustafsson,
our cooksirdar, and a handful of porters.
There were no teahouses or hotels, like the
ones on the way in to Everest from the
south; we slept in barns or camped out.
The natives often welcomed us into their
farmhouses to share a cooking fire and a
meal. It was rustic yet relaxing, and there
were no hordes of trekkers like the ones on
the way in to Everest.
Granted, technical skill on steep rock and
ice has risen dramatically since 1938. But
those early climbers were tough in ways
that we moderns aren’t. I’ve never made a
continuous overland journey by foot of
anything like 360 miles. My personal record
is just shy of 150 miles of cross-country
skiing on Baffin Island with John Stetson in
2007. True, we were each man-hauling
220-pound sleds. On that trip, though, the
crosscountry journey was the expedition.
That’s quite different from having to travel
360 miles just to get started, as the team
did in 1938.
What’s maybe even more impressive is that
the ‘38 climbers seemed to treat the
overland trek not as an unavoidable chore
but, rather, as a voyage full of both
tribulations and delights in its own right. In
just getting to the mountain, they had a rich
adventure before the real adventure even
began. In Five Miles High, Bates devotes
four chapters to the trek from Srinagar to
base camp, and they contain some of the
most lyrical passages in the book.
At Srinagar, Houston’s team met the six
Sherpa they had hired out of Darjeeling. As
all-purpose high-altitude porters, the canny
Sherpa had been vital to all the Everest
expeditions since 1921. This was, however,
the first time they were used on K2. These
six had come personally recommended by
the British Himalayan veteran H. W.
Tilman. The most accomplished of them
was Pasang Kikuli. Among his previous
expeditions was Nanda Devi in 1936, when
he and Houston had formed a close bond.
Pasang was, in fact, the team member with
by far the greatest Himalayan experience:
besides Nanda Devi, he had been on four
expeditions to Kangchenjunga and one to
Everest.
It seems like a quaint practice today, but in
the 1930s it was normal for each “sahib” to
be assigned his personal Sherpa.
Houston’s was Pasang Kikuli, who was
also the Sherpa sirdar, or head man. The
whole relationship between Sherpa and
Westerner was modeled on Victorian
colonialism, particularly that of the British.
Even though they often performed
heroically on expeditions, the Sherpa were
infallibly regarded as servants. Bates was
not being particularly racist when he wrote,
“Though slight of build, they are strong,
willing, and above all filled with enthusiasm
for mountaineering. To them an attempt on
a high mountain is a pilgrimage and the
white climber almost a holy man.” Bates
was simply reflecting the attitude of the
day.
Unfortunately, that condescension persists
even in the twenty-first century. At best,
Sherpa are described as simple people,
childlike, superstitious, and perpetually
grinning. But if something goes wrong on
an expedition, the Sherpa usually get the
brunt of the blame. I can’t count the number
of times I’ve read articles about Himalayan
ascents in which the Europeans who
reached the summit are all named, and
then a phrase such as “and three Sherpas”
gets tacked onto the end of the sentence.
Sometimes even when Sherpa die on an
expedition, they go unnamed in the official
accounts.
To get from Srinagar to Skardu, the team
hired porters, who carried the expedition’s
goods on their backs and on the backs of
their ponies. In the nomenclature of the
day, these hired hands were usually called
“coolies.” An even greater condescension
colors expedition accounts of the porters’
contributions to the march. Bates could
never have imagined just how politically
incorrect the following passage would
sound in 2009—he simply thought he was
painting an amusing scene:
Often the natives would give each of us
bouquets of flowers and then beg for the
honor of being allowed to help our Sherpas
smooth the ground and put up our tents.
Then came the real struggle. Several
coolies would plead for the privilege of
being allowed to blow up the sahib’s air
mattress, and if his Sherpa permitted it, the
victorious coolie was overjoyed. He would
puff and strain away, often blowing for a
good five minutes with the valve shut if the
Sherpa in charge didn’t watch him closely.
Next each Sherpa himself would lay out his
sahib’s sleeping bag, diary and toilet kit,
and then come up with a change of shoes
and personally take off his master’s
marching boots, if he would let him.
In all honesty, I can’t say that I wish we had
had to hike 360 miles to get to K2. But in
rereading Bates’s chapters, I realize that
we moderns have lost some of the richness
of the full expedition experience. Today it
seems that we want to race to base camp
just to start our climbs, and we forget to
savor the approach journey, with its
valuable transition from modern society into
mountain wilderness.
Just reading Bates’s evocations of the
landscape makes me envious:
The rest of the march to Kharal lay along
rocky hillsides marked infrequently across
the river with terraced villages shaded by
cool groves of apricot and mulberry trees.
Brilliant green fields of barley soothed our
eyes, even as in our imagination the shade
of the trees cooled our bodies.
A standard snafu on classic expeditions is
the porter strike. Without warning, in the
most inconvenient spot possible, the
“coolies” will throw down their packs and
refuse to go a step farther, unless their
wages are doubled or tripled. At this point,
in the Western author’s eyes, the cheerful
natives become “rogues” or “rascals.” Rare
is the climber who recognizes that the
porter strike is just another form of
bargaining, an integral part of native
culture.
Still, a porter strike can cripple an
expedition. I’ve been pretty lucky, in that
among all thirty of my expeditions, the
worst porter strike I had to face was hiking
in to Broad Peak in 1997. Several days up
the Baltoro, the porters stopped and
demanded higher wages. We had agreed
on set wages at the start on the trip, but
after a few days that didn’t seem to matter.
Our only option was to call their bluff. We
told the porters we would send them back
unpaid, while a couple of us would return to
Askole and hire new porters. Somehow that
convinced them to keep going.
The 1938 team was lucky, too, in that the
only porter strike they had to deal with
came quite late on the trek, midway
between Skardu and Askole. On May 27,
279 miles out from Srinagar, at the tiny hill
village of Yuno, the team paid off their pony
men and tried to hire local “coolies.” But
two “trouble makers” (Bates’s phrase) held
out for a wage of four and a half rupees per
man for the 44-mile carry to Askole, rather
than the two rupees and eight annas (about
95 cents) the climbers were willing to pay.
The disagreement almost turned into a
brawl, as sixty Yuno men “yelled and
surged forward.” The Sherpa seized their
ice axes and brandished them as weapons,
pleading, “Let us at them, sahibs. We do
not like these men.”
Rather than give in to the natives’ demand,
the team concocted a solution that, I think
it’s safe to say, no other expedition to the
Karakoram has ever resorted to. Bob Bates
and Norman Streatfeild decided to raft back
to Skardu to hire better porters than the
Yuno “scoundrels.”
To get from Yuno to Skardu, the men would
have to navigate twenty-eight miles of river,
first through the raging rapids of the Shigar,
then along the powerful current of the
Indus. The craft of choice was a zok. It
consisted of twenty-eight inflated goatskin
bladders covered with a framework of
slender poplar poles. The whole thing
weighed only a hundred pounds. In a
photograph reproduced in Five Miles High,
the zok looks incredibly flimsy.
All the work was done by local boatmen, as
Bates and Streatfeild sat in the middle and
hung on. Bates recounts this watery
adventure almost as a lark. The boatmen,
he says,
spent the time alternately grounding us on
sandbars, spinning us round and round in
the swift water, and examining our shoes.
When we approached rapids in the river
they put down their poles and prayed
loudly, while we spun and tossed and held
on grimly; but the raft seemed unsinkable
and we soon agreed that as long as it didn’t
turn over we were safe…. Most of the time
one or two of [the boatmen] would be
blowing up the leaky bladders or splashing
water on the raft to keep the sun from
cracking the skins. The lung power of these
fellows was amazing, for with perfect
equanimity they would blow up the very
ones we were sitting on, even while the zok
was being tossed violently by the waves.
Where the Shigar entered the Indus, the
boatmen had to make a desperate paddle
to cross the big river to the Skardu side.
The current was so strong that the zok
reached the bank two and a half miles
below the town. But it had taken only seven
hours to raft those twenty-eight miles. The
cost of the wild ride was eight and a half
rupees, or $3.15.
Bates was evidently a handy man with a
raft. In 1935, at the end of an epic fivemonth
traverse of the Saint Elias Range in
subarctic Canada and Alaska, he and two
teammates had run into the Alsek River,
which they had hoped to ford and which
they had to cross to get to civilization.
Instead, the river was in spring flood, far
too deep and swift to wade. Un-fazed,
under Bates’s direction the trio improvised
a raft out of driftwood logs, two air
mattresses, and two pairs of skis, and,
using another ski as a paddle, they pulled
off the dangerous crossing.
Apparently for the boatmen, a ride
downstream from Yuno to Skardu was all in
a day’s work. After they had arrived, they
took the zok apart and carried it in pieces
back to their home village.
In Skardu, after consulting with the
tehsildar, or local governor, Bates and
Streatfeild quickly solved the porter crisis.
By May 30, the whole expedition was back
on the trail. The perils of the trek were not
finished, however. Above the village of
Hoto, the whole caravan had to cross a
two-hundred-foot-deep gorge by means of
what Bates called a rope bridge. “Rope,”
however, was too fancy a term: the
contraption was made entirely of willow
twigs twisted and braided into cables. At
regular intervals, the bridge was stabilized
by branches jammed crossways between
the two handrails.
Bates admits that the crossing of this native
bridge was terrifying. It “creaked like an
abused wicker chair” underfoot, and as
they tiptoed gingerly along the middle
cable, the climbers recalled the Balti maxim
“No rope bridge should be repaired until it
is broken.”
By 1992, the willow-twig bridge was long
gone. In the years since Pakistan had won
its independence from India, the
approaches to the Karakoram had become
a region of military importance, so the
primitive trail the 1938 climbers had hiked
was now a good paved road, and sturdy
bridges crossed the gorges. Right out of
Skardu, for instance, you cross a giant
metal suspension bridge. In the jeep on
which we’d hitched a ride, the journey was
basically routine.
On June 3, 1938, Houston’s team reached
Askole, by their reckoning precisely 323
miles from Srinagar. So far, the worst
mishap the team had suffered was
Burdsall’s bad blisters. But now a new
crisis struck, as Petzoldt came down with a
fever of 104 degrees. Houston, the twentyfour-
year-old medical student serving as
expedition doctor, could not determine the
cause of the illness, which lasted for days.
(It was later tentatively diagnosed as
dengue fever.)
Whatever tensions might have existed
between the Wyoming cowboy and the
Eastern “nabobs,” they seemed to have
dissolved by the time the party reached
Askole. As Petzoldt’s fever raged on, the
team made an excruciating decision.
Houston, though the leader of the
expedition, would stay in Askole to minister
to his patient. The other four climbers, the
six Sherpa, and the porters hired in Askole
would forge ahead toward the Baltoro
Glacier and base camp. If Petzoldt did not
recover soon, that could mean the end of
the expedition for Houston and himself. “If
he dies,” Houston joked to his departing
comrades, “I’ll bury him and go on to meet
you. If he recovers, we’ll both try to catch
up with the expedition.”
I’ve never met Charlie Houston, but I’ve
admired him ever since, as a teenager, I
read K2: The Savage Mountain. And that
decision is one of the things for which I
admire him most. No matter how
headstrong he may have been, he was
incredibly loyal to his teammates. He
supported them to the utmost on the
expedition, and praised them to the skies
afterward. Mountaineers—especially good
ones—can be pretty coldhearted people.
But Houston seems to have been full of
compassion and empathy. And in a case
like this, he was willing to give up a goal he
had dreamed about for a year to try to
nurse a teammate back to health.
So the rest of the party pushed ahead. For
the first time, they marched beneath the
savage pyramids of K2’s outliers, peaks
that somehow seemed familiar, since they
had seen them in Vittorio Sella’s
magnificent photographs. At Paiju, “the last
little island of vegetation,” as Bates put it,
they turned a corner and saw ahead of
them “the gray back of the Baltoro Glacier,
looking like a huge reptile.” In 1992, we
found Paiju a bit squalid, since so many
other expeditions had camped and left their
trash there over the years. When I passed
through again in 2003, on the way to Broad
Peak, I saw that some Pakistani
environmental agency had built outhouses
and concrete washbasins in an effort to
clean the place up. Still, Paiju will always
be a memorable camp for me, because it
was here on our 1992 approach that Scott
and I took a full rest day, during which we
hiked up a wooded hill to a rocky ridge and
got that stunning first view of K2.
The 1938 team clambered onto the snout
of the Baltoro. The mood of Bates’s writing
at this point is uncharacteristically gloomy.
He describes “the dismal, boulder-strewn
surface” of the permanent ice and remarks,
“An air of death and decay hung over this
part of the glacier.” No doubt the men’s
spirits were dampened by the absence of
Houston and Petzoldt, but even today, the
lower stretches of the Baltoro make for
tedious hiking. You have to wind in and out
and up and down through what Bates
called “mounds and ridges of loose debris.”
Oddly enough, although you’re on a glacier,
the daytime heat is blistering, and the
ground is dry and dusty. In ‘92, we hiked
here in shorts, shading ourselves with
umbrellas but sweating like dogs the whole
way.
Of their first couple of days on the Baltoro
Glacier, Bates writes, “For us the uncertain
footing was little more than irritating, but for
our coolies, with straw or goat-skin
moccasins, the passage was severe.”
Instead of ice axes, each porter wielded a
“coolie crutch,” a wooden device stout
enough to cut steps in the ice which also
served as a tripod on which to rest one’s
load.
On June 8, the team camped at Urdukas, a
beautiful grassy oasis just off the glacier on
the southern side. For centuries, Balti
herdsmen have driven their flocks to
Urdukas to graze, but that’s as close as
most of them ever got to K2, and since you
can’t see the mountain from that patch of
greenery, that may explain why K2 scarcely
has a native name. In 1992, it was still a
lovely place; you could lounge in the grass
and get out of the sun in the shade of large
boulders that have come to rest there.
The whole hike in to K2 is utterly different
from the approaches to 8,000ers in Nepal.
If you’re hiking in to Everest on the south
side, you pass through villages with tea
shops and even restaurants. Your Sherpa
take off each night to go visit their cousins,
then show up in the morning. The whole
thing feels very civilized. On the much more
difficult approach to K2, there are no
villages—or even isolated houses—after
Askole. You’re camping out with the
porters, most of the time on the glacier. Yet
however stark or tedious it may seem at
times, that forty-mile approach up the
Baltoro is beautiful in its own right.
In 1938, while the men were loafing at
Urdukas, Pasang Kikuli suddenly pointed
west down the glacier and shouted,
“Sahibs, sahibs, look see!” Through
binoculars, the two black dots the Sherpa
had spotted proved to be Petzoldt and
Houston hiking along at a furious pace.
“How in the world did he do it?” Burdsall
exclaimed.
“Charlie fixed me up,” Petzoldt muttered as
soon as he had joined his teammates.
“How is the food holding out?”
Four days later, the climbers reached base
camp. Streatfeild paid off the porters, who
were eager to charge back down the
glacier as soon as they could, then gave
the head man a pouch containing forty-five
stones. “Throw away one stone every day,”
he said. “When they are all gone, come
back to meet us.”
Now the team had six weeks to reconnoiter
K2 and, if there was still time, to try to climb
it. But the next seventeen days amounted
to a prolonged exercise in futility. The
climbers’ first views of the Abruzzi Ridge
were not encouraging. On a foray up the
Godwin Austen Glacier, Bates and
Streatfeild had scrutinized the slopes rising
above them. They’d reported that the south
face proper looked impossible, while the
Abruzzi Ridge presented continuously
steep ice gullies and rock ribs all the way
up to the Shoulder, more than 8,000 feet
above the base.
Dividing into subgroups, the team
reconnoitered the Savoia Glacier in an
effort to reach both Savoia Pass, and thus
the beginning of the northwest ridge, and
the Godwin Austen Glacier, toward the start
of the northeast ridge. On three separate
efforts spread across two weeks, various
members failed even to get to Savoia Pass,
as they were turned back by crevasses and
ice cliffs. These were humiliating
setbacks—how could a passage that the
Courmayeur guides had pioneered twentynine
years earlier stump some of America’s
best mountaineers? The men rationalized
that conditions must have changed
radically since 1909, but privately they
nursed the fear that they weren’t strong
enough to meet the challenge.
One reason for the dogged effort to attack
the northwest ridge sprang from an
observation first made by the Duke of the
Abruzzi. From Savoia Pass, he had seen
that the rock strata on the northwest ridge
inclined upward, promising staircase-like
steps. On the southeast spur on the
diametrically opposite side of the mountain,
the Italians found just the reverse:
downward-sloping slabs and ledges that
made for treacherous climbing and
insecure campsites.
On the Matterhorn in the early 1860s, the
great British climber Edward Whymper had
made six attempts on the southwest ridge,
failing at increasingly higher points. Finally
Whymper attacked the steeper northeast
ridge, by which he succeeded in making
the first ascent, on July 14, 1865. The
difference was entirely due to the angle of
the rock strata that composed the core of
the mountain: upward-tilting on the
northeast, downward-sloping on the
southwest.
Whymper’s hard-won lesson was famous in
mountaineering annals. The Duke of the
Abruzzi intended to take the same
advantage of the angle of the strata on K2,
as did his successors in 1938. But in this
case, the mountain fooled everybody. The
northwest ridge would not be climbed for
another fifty-three years.
During the two weeks of reconnoitering, the
weather was consistently stormy.
Fortunately, the team had had the foresight
to bring willow wands, apparently at Bob
Bates’s insistence. On previous expeditions
in Canada and Alaska—especially his
amazing first ascent of Mount Lucania with
Bradford Washburn in 1937 and his
traverse of the Saint Elias Range two years
earlier—Bates had learned just how vital
wands could be. The type the 1938 party
used was a three-foot-long wooden dowel,
one end of which was painted black to
about seven inches from the head. After a
retreat in a snowstorm on the Savoia
Glacier, Bill House wrote, “We were glad
we had brought Bates’s black-painted wood
dowels to mark the trail home, for to get
lost on that part of the glacier would have
meant a night out or worse.”
To add to the woes of these discouraging
days, Petzoldt suffered from several
recurrences of his fever. Even at base
camp, he would shiver for hours, unable to
get warm despite wearing all his clothing
inside his sleeping bag. The only treatment
his baffled teammates could offer was to
brew up one hot drink after another and to
“take turns rubbing his back.”
As their efforts simply to get to the starting
points on the northeast and northwest
ridges failed, the team members kept
studying the Abruzzi Ridge. From certain
places on the Godwin Austen Glacier, they
could see beyond the 26,000-foot Shoulder
to the summit pyramid. It’s fascinating to
rediscover, in Five Miles High, the first
description ever published of the massive
hanging serac at 27,000 feet that I would
nickname the Motivator, the collapse of
which would cause so much of the tragedy
in 2008. House wrote,
Partway up this [summit] cone is a great
hanging glacier which sweeps the upper
part of the northeast ridge as well as one
corner of the Abruzzi ridge. Care would be
needed in crossing the plateau from this
last ridge, but it looked as though it could
be done safely.
On June 28, the team gathered at base
camp for what expeditioneers like to call a
“council of war.” Only two
members—Petzoldt and House—favored
an attack on the Abruzzi Ridge. Houston
and Burdsall argued for yet another attempt
to reach the northeast ridge. Bates and
Streatfeild were neutral.
During the next several days, the climbers
made a couple of very tentative thrusts up
the lower slopes of the Abruzzi. On one of
them, Houston and House discovered a
few wooden sticks, which they realized had
to be debris from the Duke of the Abruzzi’s
boxes. They had reached the highest point
to which the Italians had managed to haul
supplies, and were now only 500 feet below
the cliff where the Courmayeur guides had
turned back in 1909. Like the Italians, the
Americans recognized immediately that the
biggest problem with the Abruzzi was the
lack of suitable campsites. As House put it,
To have found such a long stretch on the
ridge devoid of any places where tent
platforms could be built and reached by
loaded men was serious. It seemed to
close up the last avenue of hope we had
had for finding a route on K2. On top of this
setback, one of our strongest climbers was
ill.
One of the things that I most respect about
the 1938 team is that after all their
setbacks, they didn’t simply pack up and go
home. By July 2, when House and Petzoldt
made the first real stab at the Abruzzi, the
party had been in the field for fifty-two days
since they had started hiking from Srinagar.
They had worn themselves out
reconnoitering K2, without as yet deciding
which route might go. It would have been
tempting to throw in the towel and leave the
solution to a 1939 expedition.
There’s a memorable passage in one of
House’s chapters revealing just how far
morale had plunged, and how thoughts of
home were tugging at each of the climbers:
The expedition spirits were now at very low
ebb. From one side of the mountain to the
other we had been unable to find a route.
Two weeks had been spent apparently to
no other purpose than to convince us that
no way we had seen was possible…. Every
one of us would have liked to be clear of
the whole business right then.
Had we been able to spend an afternoon
relaxing at the seashore or getting very
drunk, we might have realized that two
weeks of reconnaissance on a mountain as
big as K2 could not possibly be
conclusive…. At that time, however, it
seemed as though each succeeding
judgment had been upheld by later
checking and that there was no hope at all.
Unfortunately the seashore was a thousand
miles away and our supply of rum far too
slender to indulge in as an escape.
In a letter home written about this time,
Houston gave voice to his deep pessimism.
“This is a bigger, harder mountain than any
of us realized before,” he wrote, “and it will
take a better party than ours a much longer
time than we have left, in order to get
anywhere at all.”
On July 2, Petzoldt (whose feverish fits
alternated with startling recoveries) and
House started up the Abruzzi, determined
to find a campsite. They had almost given
up hope when Petzoldt crawled around a
corner and found a tiny but perfect saddle
in the ridge, protected from the wind and
falling rocks and just big enough for several
tents. The next day, the whole team,
including the Sherpa, packed loads up to
that saddle and established Camp II at
19,300 feet. (Camp I had been placed at
the base of the Abruzzi, a bit below the site
of our advance base camp in 1992.)
Studying the two photos of Camp II
published in Five Miles High, I can see why
this site looked like a godsend—an oasis of
safety in the middle of a vast and
dangerous slope. But I don’t even
remember passing that little saddle on the
spur. We didn’t pitch our first camp on the
ridge until we’d reached 20,000 feet.
Starting in the 1980s, climbers realized that
the best way to deal with the scarcity of tent
sites on the Abruzzi was to pitch camps as
far apart as possible. There are all kinds of
reasons, some of them psychological, why
this wasn’t feasible for the 1938 team.
Even before they had really gotten
launched on the Abruzzi, the team suffered
an absurd but monumental misfortune. At
Camp I, they had cached a four-gallon gas
can, containing a substantial portion of the
team’s entire supply of stove fuel. To keep
it out of the sun, the men had tucked the
can underneath an overhanging rock
embedded in the glacial ice. During the
next day, the ice melted, causing the rock
to topple on top of the can and smash it,
spilling the entire contents.
This disaster meant that throughout the rest
of the expedition, the climbers would have
to be extremely frugal in rationing their fuel.
The situation was so dire that Streatfeild,
two Sherpa, and the expedition cook
decided at once to hike to the base of
Gasherbrum I. Streatfield had been with the
French team that had attempted that
mountain in 1936, and he remembered that
the climbers had left unused gas cached
there upon their departure. But he also
remembered that after the French had
gone home, the “coolies” had returned to
scavenge what they could.
If he could find no gas beneath
Gasherbrum I, Streatfeild planned to resort
to a truly desperate expedient. He would
send one Sherpa and the cook all the way
down to Askole, a seven-day march, to
recruit porters to pack huge loads of
firewood all the way back up the Baltoro!
“This could be used at our Base Camp and
possibly higher,” House wrote, “instead of
the now precious liquid fuel.”
In the end, Streatfeild’s splinter group hiked
more than twenty miles to the French base
camp—down the Godwin Austen Glacier to
Concordia, then up the Upper Baltoro and
the South Gasherbrum glaciers. At the
French camp, which had indeed been
looted by the porters, they found not a
single ounce of stove fuel. They did
scavenge some canned meat and
vegetables, which ultimately gave the
team’s cuisine welcome variety. And, true
to his promise, Streatfeild sent one Sherpa,
Pemba Kitar, and the cook, Ahdoo, off to
Askole to gather firewood. Amazingly,
those two returned only eight days later
from a trek that normally took fourteen
days, accompanied by ten porters carrying
massive loads of “fine cedar.” Though it
was never used above base camp, the
firewood solved the expedition’s fuel
problem.
Meanwhile, throughout the first ten days of
July, the climbers pushed the route and
carried loads up the Abruzzi. To safeguard
the harder passages, the men fixed
ropes—lines made of three-eighths-inchdiameter
hemp, 1,700 feet of which the
team had purchased in Bombay. Here the
pitons Petzoldt had smuggled into the
expedition gear proved invaluable as
anchors for the ropes. Nowadays, on steep
terrain, we use jumars, mechanical
ascenders with which we attach ourselves
to nylon fixed ropes. These metal devices
slide easily up the rope, but catch and hold
fast under a downward pull. In 1938,
ascenders were still a quarter century away
from being invented. Instead, the climbers
tied knots and overhand loops in their
hemp fixed ropes, then simply hauled
themselves up with their hands.
Descending the steeper passages today,
we clip our harnesses to the fixed rope with
a figure-eight device and rappel the line. In
1938, the climbers also rappelled, but they
did so with the traditional dulfersitz, a
simple and ingenious method of wrapping
the rope in an S-bend through the crotch,
around one hip, up across the chest, and
over the opposite shoulder, invented shortly
after the turn of the twentieth century by the
great German climber Hans Dulfer. On the
hike in, Petzoldt had taught the Sherpa how
to rappel. Now they employed this vital
technique on high-angle terrain above
thousand-foot drops with all the aplomb of
the Americans.
Throughout this surge, in fact, three
Sherpa—Pasang Kikuli, Phinsoo, and Tse
Tendrup—played a crucial role, as they
carried the bulk of the loads and did most
of the work building up tent platforms by
stacking loose rocks on sloping ledges.
On July 5, the team established Camp III at
20,700 feet. Camp IV was pitched only 800
feet higher on July 13. For the first time,
hope outweighed discouragement in the
climbers’ hearts.
On my own expeditions, I’ve always found
that it’s during the storm days, when you lie
around inside your tent and try to kill time,
that the tensions among team members
tend to escalate. Confined in a small space,
elbow to elbow with another guy, you can
find that even a good buddy gets on your
nerves, let alone a teammate you’ve
already found to be slightly irritating. But
when you’re climbing hard, those tensions
dissolve and you get along better with your
partners.
From July 2 on, the 1938 team was
pushing hard, with important deeds
accomplished every day. And with this
activity, morale soared. About one happy
camp reunion, House writes, “A hot grog
was served up and somewhere an
excellent fig pudding was found. Later two
chess games started and before we knew it
Bates launched into a series of his favorite
Alaskan sourdough ballads, startling even
the Sherpas, who peered from their tents in
awe.”
Yet the climbing inevitably produced
moments of high tension and even of
anger. Since Five Miles High adheres
scrupulously to the prohibition against
airing dirty laundry, those conflicts are only
hinted at, in passages whose tone turns
semicomic. You have to read between the
lines, for instance, to decipher the real
antagonism between House and Petzoldt
on one dicey traverse. In House’s telling,
I remember in one place trying to enlarge
some ice steps with my load on my back
and a single finger linked through the head
of a piton for balance. Petzoldt, who by now
had completely recovered his strength and
spirits, unfortunately chose this moment to
deliver an enlightening and thoroughly
sound discourse on step-cutting, with
particular respect to how I might improve
my technique. He admitted later that this
was a poorly timed joke, for he had not
realized I was hanging on by my eyelashes.
On July 12, an incident occurred that,
thanks in large part to misunderstandings,
could easily have killed one or more of the
climbers. Camp III had been pitched in a
very dangerous place, directly beneath a
steep slope that was littered with loose
rocks. That day, Bates, House, and
Phinsoo had no sooner arrived at Camp III
than Houston, Petzoldt, Pasang Kikuli, and
Tse Tendrup started to carry loads above.
As they departed, they promised that “they
would be as careful as possible with the
loose rock.”
The trio who had just arrived at Camp III
set to work improving the tent platforms.
Suddenly, from 500 feet above, the first
rock fell.
It came right among us, puncturing the tent
we had just erected. From then on, at
frequent intervals, rocks dropped.
Sometimes they fell far to one side;
sometimes they flew overhead with a highpitched
hum; sometimes they crashed right
into camp, bursting like shrapnel as they hit
the slope. There was no escape.
The three men in the line of fire were
terrified—and furious. They screamed at
their comrades above. But, as House
explains, “A high wind was blowing so the
climbers could not hear our shouts and
thought the rocks were bouncing
harmlessly out to the sides.” By the time
the four men in the lead had almost
returned to camp, their three teammates
were “wild,” unable to suppress “bitter
remarks.” As they arrived, Houston,
Petzoldt, and the two Sherpa found “their
cheery greeting followed by a dead silence.
One look at the holes in all three of the
tents was enough to tell them what had
happened.”
I can completely sympathize with those
guys’ predicament. No one was really to
blame—the true cause of the potentially
fatal accident was the bad placement of
Camp III. But given the logistics of the day,
that placement was unavoidable. What else
could Houston and Petzoldt have done?
They weren’t happy with the location of
Camp III, but they had to climb. From 500
feet above, you can’t tell where the rocks
you knock loose are landing. And on that
kind of sketchy terrain, it’s almost
impossible to avoid dislodging rocks.
But in Five Miles High, House gives the
dispute a happy ending:
While we sat and sulked, seeking the most
effective way of voicing our great
displeasure, [Houston and Petzoldt]
rummaged through the food supplies. A
short time later they brought humble
offerings of jam, dates, and hot tea hastily
conjured out of sun-melted snow. With
such companions ill-humor could not last
long, and soon we were laughing
sheepishly at what we had let ourselves in
for.
So the official expedition narrative sticks to
its formula of tucking the dirty laundry out of
sight. But in her 2007 biography of
Houston, Bernadette McDonald published
excerpts from Houston’s letters home that,
when I first read them, puzzled me.
“Petzoldt has turned out to be a gem,”
Houston wrote early on in the expedition.
The tension between the cowboy and the
nabob seemed to have vanished. It was
instead Bill House of whom Houston was
critical. “He is continually complaining
about the lack of food,” Houston wrote
around June 27, “and demands much more
than we are able to provide. He is a very
fine climber, but his choice of routes is poor
and he takes far too many chances. In
addition, he has frequent depressed spells
during which is very bad company.”
These strictures are all the more surprising
in view of the fact that House led many of
the hardest pitches all the way up the
Abruzzi Ridge to just below the Shoulder,
including the indisputable crux of that
8,000-foot ascent. As I mentioned earlier,
the nearly vertical 80-foot rock fissure at
21,500 feet has been known ever since as
House’s Chimney. On July 14, with Bates
belaying, House tackled the cliff.
The team had pitched Camp IV only 75 feet
below that cliff, but the ice leading up to it
was so hard that it took the two men a full
hour to chop steps to reach the base of the
chimney. Bates set up a belay by draping a
loop of rope over a prong of rock, then
passing the rope behind the prong. That
technique harkened back to Victorian
times, but by today’s standards it seems
pretty marginal. If House had fallen off the
cliff, the hemp rope might well have
severed as it came tight on the sharp rock.
House’s lead was a desperate struggle, as
it took him two and a half hours to
surmount the 80-foot pitch. He managed to
drive a good piton near the base of the
crack, but 40 feet higher, as he stood on a
tiny ledge and tried to place a second piton,
“the metal only crumpled up after
penetrating a half-inch of rock.” (The softiron
pitons of the day, the best available,
were all too liable to bend into useless
spikes under a hammer blow. It would not
be until the 1960s that chromemolybdenum
pitons vastly improved on the
old hardware.)
To inch his way up the fissure, House got
into classic chimney position, feet flat
against one wall, back against the other.
Abruptly, however, he realized that he had
left his crampons in his pack. The metal
spikes dug into his back and caught on
nubbins of rock. Only by thrashing his way
brutally upward could House gain ground. “I
felt I was pretty close to my margin of
safety,” he later wrote, “but there were no
piton cracks and I thought anything would
be better than climbing down without some
protection from above.”
Out of sight around a corner below,
shivering with cold, Bates shouted up to
urge that House retreat. “It was a
suggestion I certainly would have liked to
follow,” House joked in retrospect. Instead,
he struggled onward, at last emerging on
top of the cliff.
The importance of House’s brilliant lead
can hardly be overestimated. In that long
band of cliff at 21,500 feet, there’s no other
weakness, so no alternative to the
chimney. If the climbers had not been able
to get up that pitch, their attempt on the
Abruzzi Ridge would have ended then and
there.
In 1992, after Scott and I drew straws and I
won the lead, I got up the fissure not by
chimneying inside it but by stemming
outside, my feet and hands spread-eagled
on rock holds on either side. Unlike House,
I wore my crampons all the way up. I was
able to clip in to a couple of pitons already
in place—”fixed pins” left by some previous
expedition. It’s almost impossible to rate
pure climbing moves on a big mountain, but
I’d say the chimney was only about 5.4.
(The decimal scale of difficulty in use today
ranges from 5.1, the easiest, to 5.15, the
hardest. In the 1960s, when pitches harder
than 5.9 started to be performed, climbers
could think of no way to rate them except
by calling them 5.10, then 5.11, and so on.)
On the other hand, I found the crack halfchoked
with ice and snow, into which I
could kick a few footholds, which I’m sure
made the pitch easier than it was for
House. No matter what, as Peter
Boardman remarked in 1980, House’s
Chimney was far harder than anything that
had been climbed on Everest by 1938.
The climbing had so worn out Bates and
House that they decided to pitch Camp V
only a little bit higher, a mere 500 vertical
feet above Camp IV. They had reached the
foot of the Black Pyramid, a steep,
triangular buttress made up of mixed rock.
By now Burdsall, though he had gamely
carried loads to the lower camps, had
dropped out of the team pushing higher on
the route. At forty-two, he was the oldest of
the five American climbers and the least
skilled technically. Streatfeild had already
withdrawn from the advance guard, as he’d
performed his fuel-searching mission to
Gasherbrum I, then turned his attention to
surveying unmapped parts of the
surrounding peaks and glaciers.
The climbers still pushing high were
reduced to Bates, House, Houston, and
Petzoldt—as well as the three strongest
Sherpa. Among those three, Pasang Kikuli
was the stalwart, performing as well as the
four Americans.
In 1992, after I’d strung a good fixed rope
down House’s Chimney, it was a routine
business to rappel down that pitch and
jumar back up it. Not so for the guys in
1938, who, carrying twenty-five-pound
loads up the chimney, had to haul
themselves hand over hand as they hung
on the loops they had tied in the fixed rope.
From July 15 to 20, as the weather held
almost perfect, the climbers frenziedly
pushed the route higher and higher.
Houston and Petzoldt made some daring,
exposed leads as they forced their way
through the Black Pyramid. The team
established a Camp VI at 23,300 feet, and
then Camp VII at 24,700 feet. On the
afternoon of July 19, Petzoldt and Houston
broke through the 25,000-foot barrier. Only
a relatively low-angle snow slope stood
between them and the Shoulder.
There’s a line of Houston’s about this gutsy
push that makes me chuckle: “After a
restful cigarette, which seemed especially
welcome at these high altitudes, we turned
again to our task.” These guys, in the
shape of their lives, were smoking all the
way up the mountain!
That evening, with everyone ensconced in
Camp VI, the team held another council of
war. Bates had calculated that the men had
only ten days’ worth of food and fuel left.
Worried about an eventual descent in bad
weather, the party decided to err on the
side of caution and send only two climbers
up to push the route to the highest possible
altitude. Without even putting the question
to a vote, the team chose Houston and
Petzoldt, as Bates and House
magnanimously stepped aside.
On July 20, all four men made the last carry
to Camp VII. They decided that the Sherpa
had “reached the limits of their climbing
ability” and so should be left behind; but at
the last minute Pasang Kikuli begged to be
included, and the “sahibs” relented.
That evening, Petzoldt and Houston settled
into their sleeping bags at Camp VII,
restless and eager for the final push the
next morning. Houston had already
concluded that there was no hope of
reaching the top; it would be achievement
enough simply to scope out a route through
the summit pyramid that might show the
way for some future party to make the first
ascent of K2. In light of subsequent events,
Petzoldt apparently did not agree.
And then the pair made a dismal discovery:
they had forgotten to bring matches with
their loads! Without matches, there would
be no way to light the stove; without the
stove, no way to melt snow into water.
Houston later wrote,
This was a catastrophe. In my pocket I
found four safety matches and five strikeanywhere
matches, all of dubious value.
The latter, brought all the way from New
York, carefully dried in the sun at many of
the lower camps, had persistently failed to
function well above 20,000 feet, and only
with extreme care and preparatory rubbings
with grease did they even glow. The safety
matches, on the other hand, were made in
Kashmir and were very fragile.
It took three matches to light the stove for
dinner. The men melted pot after pot of
snow, and even slept with a pot full of water
wrapped in their clothing and placed under
their feet, so that it would not freeze during
the night.
In the morning, it took three more matches
to light the stove to cook breakfast. The two
men were off as soon as the sun’s rays
struck their tent. Roped together 60 feet
apart, Petzoldt and Houston slowly plodded
up the snow slopes leading to the
Shoulder, often plunging in to their knees.
In an era before down jackets, each man
wore four Shetland sweaters over his
flannel shirt, with an outer windproof suit
and two pairs of wool mittens, but they still
felt the cold acutely.
On that last push, the Wyoming cowboy
came into his own. “Petzoldt was feeling
strong and moving rapidly,” Houston later
admitted, “but I had a curious weakness in
my legs, so that every upward step was an
effort requiring several breaths.” By 1:00
P.M., the two men had not only topped out
on the Shoulder but had traversed its easy
ridge to a point only 900 feet short of the
slope that leads up to the Bottleneck
couloir.
The men ate a quick lunch, then unroped,
hoping to dry the coiled line by laying it out
in the sun. Petzoldt continued in the lead.
Houston later recalled,
I could see him ahead of me working
steadily upward, pausing now and then to
take bearings. My progress was ludicrously
slow. Every inch I gained in altitude was an
effort. My legs were so weak I was forced
to rest every five or six steps, and soon
fatigue made me forget all danger from
above. I struggled on—why I do not know.
At last Houston gave up and sat down with
his back against a large boulder, trying to
warm himself in the sun. Petzoldt plugged
onward. He reached a point several
hundred feet higher than his partner before
turning around himself. At 26,000 feet,
Petzoldt was still 2,250 feet below the
summit.
All his life, Houston inclined toward the
mystical. Of that high point on K2 he later
wrote,
I tried to look ahead years into the future so
as to cement firmly in my mind recollections
of these great moments on our mighty
peak. There were other emotions too deep
to be expressed. I felt that all my previous
life had reached a climax in these last
hours of intense struggle against nature….
I believe in those minutes at 26,000 feet on
K2, I reached depths of feeling which I can
never reach again.
The two men started down at 4:00 P.M.,
reaching their tent as dusk turned to
twilight. They had a desperate craving for
hot tea, but there were only three matches
left. Houston recalled:
With infinite care we waxed one of the
matches, dried it as much as possible, and
struck it. It fizzled and went out. A safety
match broke off at the head. Paul in a
gesture of bravado struck our last one. It lit
and we were assured of our warm supper.
Too tired for much talk, we melted water for
the morning, snuggled in our sleeping
bags, and drowsed off to a dreamless
sleep.
The climb was over, but not the expedition.
It took three more days for the team to
climb carefully back to base camp,
retrieving gear (but not the fixed ropes) as
they went; six more days to hike with their
porters back to Askole; and eleven more
days, some of them on horseback, to return
to Srinagar by a shorter route than the one
they had taken on the way out. All told,
from Srinagar to Srinagar the expedition
lasted ninety days.
Exhausted though the men must have been
after their effort on K2, they regarded the
retreat from the Karakoram as simply the
final stage in a three-month lark. For all six
of the “sahibs,” the expedition had been
one of the greatest adventures of their
lives. In the last pages of Five Miles High,
Burdsall sums up the team’s sense of
satisfaction:
Behind us were unforgettable days—days
on the march, and days on the peak,
whose memories we would not exchange
for anything. No harm had come to us or to
any of our helpers. In a few days we must
say farewell to our Kashmiri and our faithful
little Sherpas…. Later we sahibs too must
part to go our separate ways, but we knew
that our bond of friendship would last as
long as life itself.
Alas, the aftermath of the 1938 expedition
to K2 would turn out not to be quite so
clean and pure. It’s always seemed to me
that one of the saddest things that can
happen in mountaineering is for teammates
to get along well during an expedition, only
to have a falling out afterward. One of the
best-known examples is the partnership of
the Austrian Peter Habeler with the
Tyrolean Reinhold Messner. During the
1970s, they set the climbing world on fire,
with such astounding deeds as the ascent
of the Eiger Nordwand in a then-record
time of ten hours. In 1978, Habeler and
Messner pulled off their greatest feat when
they climbed Everest without bottled
oxygen, despite widespread predictions
that climbers would die or suffer irreversible
brain damage in such an attempt.
Messner and Habeler apparently got along
fine on Everest. The trouble came
afterward, in the discrepancies between the
books the two men wrote about their
adventure. (Messner, who always had an
outsized ego, seems to have resented the
fact that Habeler would write a book at all.)
The media seized upon the conflict, and the
two former best friends began a feud that
lasted a quarter century. To their credit,
these two great mountaineers finally
patched up their quarrel and even climbed
together again.
After K2, Paul Petzoldt stayed on in India
for several months. His initial intention was
simply to sightsee, but he soon fell under
the spell of a very odd duck named Dr.
Johnson. The man was a retired physician
from California who had come to India as a
Baptist missionary, repudiated his faith, and
set himself up as a guru of a mystical
Buddhist cult. Petzoldt was so taken with
Johnson (whose first name he could not
later recall), that he arranged to have his
wife, Patricia, join him at Johnson’s
compound in the village of Dera Baba
Jaimal Singh.
On January 25, 1939, gathering tensions
within the Johnson household exploded.
The only published versions of this bizarre
event appear in the two biographies of
Petzoldt, and they disagree in many details.
Since the first biography, On Top of the
World, was written by Patricia herself, who
was present at the time, it may be suspect,
because her agenda would have been to
exonerate her husband of any wrongdoing.
But even the more reliable account, in
Raye Ringholz’s 1997 On Belay!, depends
entirely on Petzoldt’s own story of what
happened.
In this telling, Johnson’s wife, who is
portrayed as a depressive paranoiac,
suddenly seized a shotgun and tried to
shoot Petzoldt with it. Petzoldt grabbed the
stock of the gun, struggled with her for
several moments, wrenched the weapon
out of her hands, and threw it out a window.
In the melee, Dr. Johnson had hurried into
the room. As Petzoldt fled into the
courtyard, he accidentally knocked
Johnson down. The guru’s head struck the
stone floor and he was instantly killed.
(In the 1960s, in climbing circles, the
scuttlebutt told an utterly different story. In
this version, Petzoldt had ended up in a
fistfight with a porter on some sort of trek
and had killed him with a single blow to the
head. Like most Wyoming cowboys,
Petzoldt had honed his skills as a brawler
and bar fighter. The climbing gossip had it
that Petzoldt was allowed to leave India
only after promising that he would never
return to the country.)
In Ringholz’s account, Petzoldt and the
other witnesses to the accident fabricated a
bogus version of what had happened. Even
so, Petzoldt was charged with
manslaughter and underwent a three-day
trial before he was acquitted. By then, he
was flat broke. The American consul took
him under his wing and communicated with
Charlie Houston, who was back in the
United States. Houston shared the news
with Bates and House. The four men
scrounged up $550, which they wired to
Calcutta. The money paid for both
Petzoldts’ passage home by steamer.
Yet according to Ringholz, Petzoldt never
realized that his teammates had come to
his financial rescue. “I never knew that they
sent the money there,” he told his
biographer. “If they sent money to the
consul, I never got it.”
After interviewing those former teammates,
Ringholz wrote:
Unfortunately, the $550 has been the
source of ill feeling among the members of
the K2 expedition for almost sixty years.
Houston, House, and Bates claim it was
difficult for them to scrape up that amount
of money in those days when they were
young and not established. They expected,
and contend that Petzoldt promised them,
that on his return to the States the loan
would be repaid.
Houston’s biographer Bernadette
McDonald comes to a similar conclusion:
Back in the United States, Charlie received
an urgent cable from the Consul General
requesting money. Together with his father,
he quietly made the necessary
arrangements for Petzoldt to return. Charlie
never completely forgave Petzoldt for not
thanking his family for helping him out in
this moment of need. Petzoldt claimed
ignorance on the source of the money, but
the friendship subsequently withered.
Whether or not this event caused the
estrangement between Petzoldt and
Houston, there seems to have been
another source of lasting rancor between
the men. Houston always felt that his team
had done the very best it could on K2. To
have reached 26,000 feet on the first real
attempt on the great mountain was more
than anyone could have hoped for. But
Petzoldt evidently thought the team could
have done better.
A little-known fact about the 1938
expedition is that the members took along a
movie camera, with which they shot
footage not only on the approach to the
Baltoro but all the way up to Camp III on
the Abruzzi. In 2004, sixty-six years after
the expedition, Houston had the best
footage remastered and put on a DVD. A
DVD disk was inserted in a plastic sleeve in
each copy of McDonald’s Brotherhood of
the Rope.
There’s some amazing footage from that
expedition. For me, the most moving scene
was shot as the climbers packed up their
camps in a gathering storm to head down
the mountain. The camera catches a tent
flapping wildly in the wind, in front of which
Bob Bates is grinning as he sings his head
off—perhaps some Alaska sourdough ditty
or one of the railroad ballads, such as “The
Wreck of the Old 97,” that he had
memorized and would sing at the drop of a
hat for the rest of his life. There’s no sound
track on the film, but in the voice-over that
he supplied in 2004, Houston narrates:
We have done what we came to do. We
have found a route to the summit cone, and
we’re very happy and ready to go Home….
As the storm thickens, it’s clear that we
must start for home as soon as the weather
clears. In a few days it does clear, and we
go on down to base camp, arriving there
two days later, very excited, very happy.
We have accomplished far more than most
people expected we would. We have found
a route up the mountain, and we enjoyed
every minute of our success.
That formula summarizes Houston’s lasting
feelings about the 1938 expedition. But
Petzoldt’s lasting feelings were
different—and less happy.
A friend of mine met Petzoldt in 1963, when
he took a job as an assistant instructor at
the Colorado Outward Bound School near
Marble. Petzoldt, who was then fifty-five,
was serving as one of the school’s senior
guides. My friend, who was only twenty,
was completely in awe of the great man.
But one day he got up the nerve to ask
Petzoldt about reaching their high point on
K2 in 1938. Petzoldt said simply, “I wanted
to go on. Charlie decided to turn back.”
Asked the same question by Raye Ringholz
for her 1997 biography, Petzoldt responded
more vehemently. “Jesus Christ,” he said.
“We weren’t turned back by bad weather.
We made up our mind not to climb the
mountain. If we’d have brought up a little bit
more food and planned to get to the
summit, we could have gone back as
conquerors of K2!”
Well, that’s how memory works. In
hindsight, it’s pretty hard to congratulate
yourself for making the right decision and
turning back. I know that’s been a key to
my own success on the 8,000ers—turning
around and coming back to fight another
day, even when it means giving up the
glory. There’s no doubt in my mind that in
1938, Houston and Petzoldt made the right
decision. They reached the highest point
they could, while still allowing the whole
team to get safely down.
But the anguish of that “what might have
been” seems to have gnawed away at
Petzoldt for the rest of his life. For whatever
reasons, he never went back to the
Himalaya or the Karakoram. The final
word—and the saddest—on the gulf
between Petzoldt and Houston came at the
Telluride mountain film festival in the late
1990s. Both men were on a panel
celebrating K2. The chairperson was Rick
Ridgeway, who in 1978 had been one of
the first four Americans to climb K2. In
Brotherhood of the Rope, Bernadette
McDonald replayed the scene:
[Petzoldt] said that he had been opposed to
the decision to go down, and that the
decision had been taken because Charlie
wasn’t feeling well. Ridgeway looked over
at Charlie and raised his eyebrows. Charlie
said nothing. He was hurt and angry, but he
didn’t respond.
As far as I know, Petzoldt never claimed
that if Houston hadn’t decided to turn
around, the two of them (or Petzoldt solo)
could have reached the summit on July 21.
Petzoldt’s declaration at the Telluride
festival implies that he felt the team hadn’t
built up enough supplies or pushed their
deadlines hard enough to make a
legitimate try for the summit. It’s just
possible that he harbored a private fantasy
that he could have gone for the top alone
on July 21, as Hermann Buhl would do on
Nanga Parbat in 1953. But it wouldn’t have
been realistic.
Look at our own 1992 expedition. Vlad,
who was a really strong climber, and who
had the advantage of more than half a
century of improvement in gear and
knowledge of the mountain, left his camp
on the Shoulder at 3:00 A.M. with a strong
partner. He didn’t reach the summit until
9:00 P.M., after eighteen straight hours of
climbing. Then he had to bivouac on the
way down.
Houston and Petzoldt didn’t reach the
upper end of the Shoulder until 1:00 P.M.
on July 21. By that point they were already
worn out from the climb from Camp VII.
Even if Petzoldt had been strong enough to
go all the way to the top, there’s no way he
could have gotten there before nightfall. My
God, in 1938 they didn’t even have
headlamps—just flashlights they’d hold in
one hand! And with the clothing they wore,
I doubt that either Petzoldt or Houston
could have survived a bivouac above
26,000 feet. And even if they had survived,
they might have suffered debilitating
frostbite.
In no sense should the 1938 expedition
ever be regarded as a failure. It was,
instead, a true breakthrough. When the
summits of the fourteen 8,000ers were
finally reached for the first time, between
1950 and 1964, only a single
one—Annapurna—was climbed on the first
attempt (and that at the cost of Herzog’s
fingers and toes and Lachenal’s toes). K2
would finally be climbed only on the fourth
attempt (or the sixth, if you count the 1902
and 1909 expeditions).
One of the things I admire about the 1938
expedition is that all the serious climbing
was carried out by a team of only four,
aided by three brave Sherpa, including the
indomitable Pasang Kikuli. Whatever went
on between them after the expedition,
those four men became good friends on the
mountain as they worked together with
clockwork precision.
Their effort was a far cry from the kinds of
huge militaristic expeditions countries
would launch against the 8,000ers in the
1950s. I suppose that in a sense, Houston
and his teammates carried an American
banner to K2, but their expedition had
nothing to do with nationalism. Ever since I
first read Five Miles High, that 1938 team
has served as a model for me of what a
small group working in harmony can
achieve on an 8,000er. By pioneering the
route by which K2 would eventually be
climbed, and by getting to 26,000 feet, they
pulled off a magnificent achievement.
4
THE GREAT
MYSTERY
The deepest mystery in K2 history is what
happened on the 1939 expedition. All the
other major campaigns on the mountain
produced not only “official” books but
articles and chapters in memoirs by the
principal climbers. From the 1939
expedition, the only English-language
publications to see the light of day were a
dutiful and unilluminating article published
in 1940 in The American Alpine Journal
and a more illuminating (but still brief)
account by the leader of the expedition that
appeared seventeen years later in
Appalachia, the journal of the Appalachian
Mountain Club.
Yet no K2 expedition—not even the vexed
first ascent in 1954—ever provoked a storm
of controversy comparable to the one that
engulfed the 1939 climbers on their return
home. As Galen Rowell writes in In the
Throne Room of the Mountain Gods, his
personal account of a star-crossed
American attempt on K2’s northwest ridge
in 1975, the 1939 expedition produced “the
most bizarre tragedy in the history of
Himalayan mountaineering.”
As is seldom true in climbing, the
controversy was deeply enmeshed in the
politics of the day. And the troubles that
would afflict the 1939 team were set in
motion even before the members left the
United States, as Fritz Wiessner assumed
leadership of the party.
In the winter of 1937–38 (as mentioned in
the previous chapter), while he tried to
assemble his K2 team, Charlie Houston
suspected that Wiessner had deliberately
put off his own expedition until the summer
of 1939, in hopes that Houston’s party
might pave his way with a thorough
reconnaissance of the mountain. Whether
or not Wiessner’s motives were so
Machiavellian, that was exactly what
happened, for in reaching 26,000 feet on
the Abruzzi Ridge, Houston and his
partners had demonstrated that K2 would
best be climbed by that route.
Houston’s irritation was ratcheted up a
notch when he began to suspect that
Wiessner had already exacted pledges for
the 1939 expedition from some of the best
American climbers. In a letter to Bob Bates,
Houston fumed,
Wiessner has asked him to go next year
and Bill [House] thinks that would fit in
better with his career. Bill makes number
three that is not coming with us because
Wiessner has extended hope of next year
to him. I am so damn mad at Wiessner I
have been aching to write him a fiery letter
all day, but hope to restrain myself.
In the end, of course, House joined the
1938 team, which, ironically, meant that
Wiessner’s friend and partner from the first
ascent of Mount Waddington was not
available for K2 in 1939.
The tragedy that would unfold that summer
had everything to do with the makeup of
the party. Besides Bill House, Wiessner
hoped that Paul Petzoldt would be able to
return to K2, but the fatal accident in India
involving Petzoldt made that impossible.
Through the winter of 1938–39, Wiessner
doggedly lined up potential teammates. At
one point, four very strong climbers were
on board. Bestor Robinson had met
Wiessner at the foot of Waddington, as part
of a team of strong California rock climbers
who had their own designs on the
mountain. Wiessner had magnanimously
given the Californians the first crack at
Waddington. He and Bill House had made
the first ascent only after Robinson’s crew
turned back 600 feet below the summit.
Back on the glacier after their defeat,
Robinson hiked over to Wiessner’s camp
and said, “It’s all yours. We’re just not
ready for it.” In the process, the two men
became friends.
Al Lindley, a Yale graduate from
Minnesota, had made the second ascent of
Mount McKinley in 1932; he was also an
expert ski mountaineer. Sterling Hendricks
had perfected the art of lightweight assaults
on remote and little-known mountains,
particularly in western Canada. Roger
Whitney, yet another Yalie, had learned to
climb in the Alps, and had made first
ascents in Alaska, Canada, and the Tetons.
On paper, then, Wiessner’s party boasted
plenty of skill and experience. At various
times through the spring of 1939, however,
all four of those strong teammates backed
out of the expedition. Some of Wiessner’s
critics later tried to see those defections as
rooted in a distrust of Wiessner’s
leadership, but I don’t buy it. In those days,
nobody could make a living from mountain
climbing. All those guys had jobs they
couldn’t sacrifice: Whitney was a physician,
Hendricks a biochemist, and Lindley and
Robinson were lawyers. Then, as now, an
expedition to K2 was an expensive
undertaking. Climbers often back out of
such trips after they’ve made a tentative
commitment to them. Look at our own K2
team in 1992: Scott went from having so
many teammates lined up—that he had to
put me on the waiting list—to heading off to
Pakistan with only me as a partner.
In the end, Wiessner had to scrounge
among casual friends he had met climbing
or skiing. And he was swayed to include
relatively inexperienced candidates whose
deep pockets could help pay the cost of the
expedition. The pivotal figure in this roster
was Dudley Wolfe, a near millionaire from
Boston. After graduating from Harvard,
Wolfe had become an expert in longdistance
sailing races, as well as a
competent skier. But he had taken up
climbing only in 1936. By 1939, he was
overweight and forty-four years old.
According to Andrew Kauffman and William
Putnam, the authors of K2: The 1939
Tragedy—published in 1992, it remains the
only book-length chronicle of the
expedition—Wolfe “required more than one
guide [in the Alps] to haul his large bulk to
the summits…. He was not accustomed to
making decisions in the mountains and
could move over difficult terrain only with
the guidance and help of others.” Wolfe’s
funding may have been the chief reason
why Wiessner invited him to K2, but on the
mountain, against all odds, he would
perform better than all the other Americans
(except, of course, Wiessner himself).
Forty-two-year-old Eaton (“Tony”) Cromwell
was also a blueblood with access to
money. Like Wolfe, he had climbed mostly
with guides. As Kauffman and Putnam
sardonically put it, Cromwell’s “main
climbing qualifications for candidacy on the
1939 expedition consisted of the longest,
but not most distinguished, list of mountain
ascents of any member of the American
Alpine Club; and there is some reason to
believe that no one ever attempted to
surpass this record, much less to boast of
it.” Cromwell, in other words, was what we
climbers dismissively call a “peak bagger.”
In the 1930s, forty-four and forty-two were
pretty advanced ages for climbers
attempting K2. But Wiessner, at thirty-nine,
was at the top of his alpine game, and that
summer he was, by his own report, in the
best shape of his life. He had reached
23,000 feet on Nanga Parbat in 1932, and
his record of technical first ascents in
Europe and the United States was
unmatched by any other American.
The party was rounded out by two
Dartmouth students. Chappell Cranmer had
shared part of a single season with
Wiessner in the Canadian Rockies, but the
bulk of his experience consisted of
weekends on New England crags and
slogs up easy peaks in Colorado. His
classmate George Sheldon was even less
experienced, with only two seasons in the
Tetons under his belt, during which he
seconded routes led by more accomplished
climbers. Both Dartmouth boys were only
twenty years old.
As the team sailed for Europe in March, it
must have been obvious to Wiessner that
he was the leader of perhaps the weakest
team to that date ever to attempt an
8,000er—much less the formidable K2.
Executives of the American Alpine Club,
which officially sponsored the expedition,
were so apprehensive that at the last
minute they recruited a sixth man, Jack
Durrance. A twenty-six-year-old Dartmouth
medical student, Durrance had become a
first-rate rock climber in the Bavarian Alps
after his family had moved to Munich. Back
in the States, he worked three summers as
a guide in the Tetons, where he compiled a
record of first ascents in that spiky range
that was second only to Petzoldt’s. His
finest climb was the first ascent of the north
face of Grand Teton—with Petzoldt and
Petzoldt’s brother, Eldon. On that daunting
route, Durrance led the hardest pitches.
Durrance should have been a powerful
addition to the party, but for strange
reasons, it would not work out that way. He
caught up with his teammates in Genoa,
where they all boarded a steamship for
India. And from that moment on, things
started to go wrong.
Wiessner had not been notified of the
addition of Durrance to the party. In Genoa,
he was expecting to meet Bestor Robinson,
who had backed out only after the other
five climbers had sailed for Europe.
Greeting Durrance, Wiessner could not
suppress his shock and dismay, and
Durrance was badly hurt by his leader’s
reaction. In his diary, Durrance wrote a few
weeks later, “Can’t quite forget Fritz’s look
of disappointment at finding insignificant
Jack filling Bestor Robinson’s boots.”
On all thirty of my expeditions to 8,000ers, I
don’t think I ever joined a party as weak as
that 1939 team. There were plenty of feeble
performers among the Americans in 1992
on K2, as I kept complaining to my diary,
but we also had enough strong
guys—particularly Scott, Charley Mace,
and Neal Beidleman—to put together a
decent summit effort. In 1939, Wiessner
was the only member of the team who had
ever previously been on a mountain in the
great ranges, whether in Alaska, the
Andes, the Himalaya, or the Karakoram. It’s
hard for me to say, particularly given the
half-century gap between Wiessner’s era
and mine, but I think that if I had found
myself part of a party with as little collective
experience as that one, I’d have backed
out. And if I’d been the leader, I might have
called off the whole endeavor.
Inexperienced teammates can get you in
trouble on a serious mountain. John
Roskelley, the best American high-altitude
climber of the 1980s and my teammate on
Kangchenjunga in 1989, had an ironclad
principle that he would never jumar up a
fixed rope that had been anchored by
someone else. He didn’t trust any
teammate to fix those anchors the way he
trusted himself. (I’m not so adamant about
this myself, but I respect Roskelley’s
stubborn self-reliance.)
Inexperience among the teammates on the
1939 expedition would contribute directly to
the tragedy. But there’s no evidence that
Wiessner ever thought of calling off the
show. For one thing, he had an ace up his
sleeve: he had recruited nine Sherpa in
advance. Five of them were returning from
Houston’s expedition of the previous year:
Pasang Kikuli, Phinsoo, and Tse Tendrup,
who had all carried loads high on the
Abruzzi; Pemba Kitar, who had performed
the extraordinary errand of dashing down to
Askole to recruit porters to carry firewood
up to base camp; and Sonam. Rounding
out the Sherpa contingent were Pasang
Lama, who would play a pivotal role on the
‘39 expedition, Tsering, Dawa Thondup,
and Pasang Kitar.
If the American team was weak, the nine
Sherpa amounted to as strong a cast as
had ever signed on for an expedition to an
8,000er. It is no exaggeration to say that in
1939, Pasang Kikuli was the most
experienced high-altitude climber in the
world, with six previous expeditions to
8,000ers (seven if you count Nanda Devi,
which is just under 8,000 meters). Kikuli
had seen tragedy before, on Nanga Parbat
in 1934, when eight climbers died after
getting trapped in a storm high on the
mountain. (That and the equally
catastrophic 1937 Nanga Parbat expedition
were, in the words of historian James
Ramsey Ullman, “as sheer horror stories,
unmatched by anything in the history of
mountaineering.”) The dead in 1934
included the team’s leader, Willi Merkl (the
finest German Himalayan mountaineer of
his time), two German teammates, and five
Sherpa. Kikuli narrowly escaped the same
fate but suffered serious frostbite. It’s a
testament to what a powerful and devoted
climber Kikuli was that he continued to go
on so many dangerous expeditions. In
1939, he was the sirdar again, as he had
been in 1938, and he became Wiessner’s
“personal” Sherpa, just as he had been
Houston’s the year before.
The 1939 team faced the same 360-mile
hike to base camp from Srinagar that
Houston’s party had performed. But before
the Americans even left the Vale of
Kashmir, Wiessner arranged for eight days
of acclimatization, during which the
members practiced skiing on the nearby
hills, combined with cushy living in
houseboats in that colonial paradise. It was
an ideal warm-up for the expedition.
Describing the outing in a letter to the AAC
treasurer, Wiessner was full of enthusiasm:
Our party is really exceptionally congenial.
We have lots of fun. I am terribly pleased
with it. Today’s ski ascent seemed
exceptionally easy to everybody, and it
makes me very happy and hopeful to see
that the physical condition of the party is so
good.
On May 2, the team left Srinagar. The
overland journey proceeded smoothly, as
the caravan averaged fifteen miles a day.
The climbers’ letters home (many of which
are quoted in Kauffman and Putnam’s K2:
The 1939 Tragedy) report continuously
high spirits. The members’ sense of
participating in an extended lark matched
that of their predecessors the year before.
On May 6, George Sheldon wrote,
You probably want to know how we
individually are getting along. Fritz, despite
an enormous amount of work, is doing
nicely. We have named him Baby Face
Sahib. Chap, wise and silent as the owl, is
brown as a berry. Jack and his lusty sense
of humor, which once in a while draws
howls of disapproval, is the acting doctor
because he is considering the medical
profession. Tony, or Pop Sahib, is the
Voice of Experience and doing very well at
it. He came out with this amazing statement
today; “Climbing is fun.”
Two days later, Wiessner wrote to the AAC
executive:
The boys are such a nice lot, taking
everything from the easy side and hitting
hard when necessary, it is fun to be a
member of such a congenial group.
Sometimes they may be a little too carefree
but one word suffices to make them do
their duty and work hard. I feel quite certain
they will do well on the mountain.
Without mishap, the team reached Askole
on May 21. From that last village, having
hired 123 porters—forty-eight more than
the 1938 team had employed—the
expedition marched eastward, camping at
Paiju and Urdukas, then on the Baltoro
Glacier. Even before reaching the glacier,
Pemba Kitar came down with a mysterious
and persistent illness and had to be sent all
the way back to Skardu to see a doctor.
Though he would rejoin the team, the
Sherpa who had played a critical role in
1938 would play none in 1939.
A pair of short-lived porter strikes (the
second caused by a shortage of snow
goggles) delayed the team slightly, but by
May 31 they were installed at base camp.
In terms of schedule, they were two weeks
ahead of the 1938 expedition.
The agreement crafted with the porters as
they were paid off and sent back to Askole
would turn out to play a vital part in what
went wrong on the expedition. Kauffman
and Putnam summarize the exchange:
Absent new instructions, [the porters] were
to return on July 23 for the homeward
journey. This gave the team fifty-three days
in which to ascend the mountain, ample
time Fritz believed; by then someone would
have reached the top or the attempt would
have been abandoned.
So far on the expedition, nearly everything
had gone well. But no sooner had the team
settled in to base camp than Chappell
Cranmer came down with a serious illness.
His temperature rose to 102 degrees, and,
as Durrance wrote in his diary, “He
coughed profusely and expectorated
quantities of phlegm & slime.” Durrance
gave the young man various medications,
but his condition only worsened. By 6:00
P.M. on June 1, Cranmer had severe
diarrhea and was still spewing mucus.
Durrance was so alarmed that he gave his
patient artificial respiration for two hours.
The symptoms sound like those of
pulmonary edema, but they could also fit
any number of other illnesses with
pulmonary symptoms. If you combine
traveling through a third-world country with
the plagues of high altitude, you can come
down with all sorts of maladies that people
have rarely heard of. I’ve had to deal with
teammates who were suddenly afflicted
with pulmonary edema, though usually at
much higher altitudes—Gary Ball at 26,000
feet on K2, for instance. Cranmer had
succumbed at an altitude of only 16,500
feet. On the other hand, pulmonary edema
has been known to strike victims at
altitudes as low as 10,000 feet. The odd
thing about the condition is that it can
happen to anyone—previous experience on
high mountains seems irrelevant. So does
the kind of shape you’re in. J.-C. Lafaille
got it in 2003 as we summited on Broad
Peak and had a really hard time getting
down the mountain. Only two weeks
before, we had climbed Nanga Parbat
together, and J.-C. had also reached the
summit of Dhaulagiri just before that. I
thought that on Broad Peak he would have
been so well acclimatized as to be basically
immune to altitude-related illness, but that’s
not how it works. I’m just lucky that neither
pulmonary nor cerebral edema has ever
laid me low.
In 1939, pulmonary edema was virtually
unknown. Durrance diagnosed Cranmer’s
malady as either pneumonia or “cardiac
decompensation.” There was little he could
do for his patient except hold his head,
keep him warm, try to clean him up, and
give him such medicines as phenobarbitol,
a sedative. We know today (as Durrance
could not) that the most important thing to
do to save the life of a victim of either kind
of edema is to get him at once to a lower
altitude. If that’s not possible, all you can do
is put the victim on supplemental oxygen.
Even if the 1939 party had known about the
importance of getting to a lower altitude at
once, it would not have been an easy task.
Descending the glacier, they would have
lost altitude only very gradually. Cranmer
could not walk, so the men would have had
to improvise a litter.
Cranmer slowly recovered, but he was
essentially out of action as the team started
up the Abruzzi Ridge. Meanwhile, the five
healthy climbers and the strongest Sherpa
began to build a logistical pyramid of wellstocked
camps. By June 21, the team had
established its Camp IV just beneath
House’s Chimney. Learning from their
predecessors’ frightening experience,
Wiessner’s crew avoided camping on the
20,700-foot platform where the 1938 party’s
tents had been bombarded by rocks kicked
loose from above. Instead, the 1939 team
used that nook only as a supply depot.
Wiessner always claimed that he had made
a real effort to get along with Durrance from
the start. In 1984, he told a writer:
I knew Jack as a great sportsman, and I
knew he was strong. He’d done some
climbing in Munich when he lived there,
and he had good climbs in the Tetons. But I
also knew he was very competitive, which
might cause troubles. Actually, at that time I
liked Durrance, and hoped he could do
well.
But tensions between the two men began
to spark only a day or two after the team
reached base camp. To the same writer,
Wiessner recounted an unhappy conflict:
On our first trip up the glacier, I wanted to
check a little bit on safety and roping. We
had two ropes. Soon Jack’s rope started to
put up speed, trying to go faster than the
others. Cromwell and Wolfe said to me,
“What’s up? Do we have to do this
running?” When we got back to base camp,
I gave a long talk. I said, “Look, fellows, I
can tell you right now, we will never climb
this mountain if there’s competition
between the members. Get it out of your
head. We have to work really hard and
work together.” Jack didn’t say anything,
but seemed to agree.
After the expedition, and ever since,
Wiessner was criticized for his style of
leadership. Certainly his notion of his role
as leader differed from Houston’s. In 1938,
nearly all the decisions were made by
consensus; though officially the leader,
Houston was uncomfortable with that very
label, referring to himself instead as the
team’s “organizer.”
Wiessner was far more dictatorial, and
sometimes condescending, as in the letter
quoted above in which he referred to the
other climbers as “the boys” (even though
Cromwell and Wolfe were older than he
was) and praised them when they were
able to “do their duty and work hard.” But
it’s here that the politics of the day—both
climbing politics and the international
antagonisms that were about to explode in
World War II—get all tangled up with what
happened on K2 in 1939.
Because he was German-born, Wiessner
was all too easily stereotyped as having a
“Teutonic” character and style of
leadership. Writing as late as 1992,
Kauffman and Putnam lapse again and
again into that kind of ethnic caricature.
According to them, Wiessner had a “heavy
personality.” He was “hard in body, Spartan
(but not invariably), stoic in outlook, ready
for sacrifice, and dedicated to the
achievement of what became his life’s
ambition.” Even more explicitly,
German by birth and upbringing, Fritz had
been reared in the school of absolute
obedience to authority that characterizes
much of the Teutonic ethos: the leader
leads, and the troops obey, whatever the
situation. He may have been ideally suited
to command a German venture, but his
background did not lend it-self to directing
Americans….
Fritz was no humanist. Rather he preached
Darwinian naturalism with its emphasis on
survival of the fittest. The weak must perish
so the strong may live—such was his
philosophy….
To my mind, this stereotyping is completely
unfair, and the qualities that Kauffman and
Putnam ascribe to Wiessner had nothing to
do with what happened in 1939. In K2: The
Story of the Savage Mountain, the English
historian Jim Curran offers an eloquent
rebuttal:
It is … all too easy to fall into the trap of
racial stereotyping. Undoubtedly Wiessner
was a rigid, single-minded, humourless and
authoritarian figure. But these are by no
means exclusively Teutonic
characteristics—it is not hard to think of
British, French and Italian climbers who
have over the years displayed the same
qualities and earned themselves huge
accolades in the process.
To understand the climbing politics of the
1930s, one needs a bit of background.
Mountaineering was essentially invented in
the Alps at the end of the eighteenth
century. The first great deed was the
ascent of Mont Blanc in 1786. Throughout
the nineteenth century, British climbers
were in the forefront of the game;
Americans didn’t really take it up until the
beginning of the twentieth century. By the
1930s, both Brits and Americans had
adopted a conservative, rearguard
approach to the pastime. The debate over
“ironmongery”—the use of pitons,
carabiners, and other metal devices—was
a hot issue of the day. In disdaining those
aids in 1938, Charlie Houston was
subscribing to the Anglo-American view,
while Paul Petzoldt had a more European
outlook.
In the 1930s, the most technically
advanced climbers in the world were
Germans, Austrians, Italians, and French.
The debate crystallized dramatically
around attempts to climb the north face of
the Eiger in Switzerland—the “last great
problem” of the Alps, as many called it. The
leading contenders were Germans and
Austrians, and the face was so dangerous
that eight out of the first ten men who tried
it died in the effort.
The campaign on the Eiger provoked a
virulent reaction in England and America. In
1937 Colonel E. L. Strutt, president of the
Alpine Club, called the Eiger climbers
“mentally deranged,” adding, “He who
succeeds first may rest assured that he has
accomplished the most imbecile variant
since mountaineering began.” In the United
States, the writer and mountaineer James
Ramsey Ullman deplored how “perverted
nationalism can infect even the most
unpolitical of human activities.”
The Eiger Nordwand was finally climbed in
the summer of 1938 by two Austrians who
teamed up with two Germans. Although the
climbers themselves insisted that their
passion had nothing to do with politics,
Hitler gave them medals in a public
ceremony before a cheering throng. This
only reinforced the Anglo-American
conviction that the best climbers in the Alps
were Fascist maniacs throwing away their
lives for Fuhrer and Vaterland.
Although Fritz Wiessner had immigrated to
the States in 1929 partly to escape looming
Fascism and had become an American
citizen six years later, he was regarded by
some of the more conservative higher-ups
in the AAC with the kind of suspicion that
had attached itself to the German and
Austrian Eiger climbers. And that suspicion
deepened after the 1939 tragedy on K2.
Through the first three weeks of June,
various members, including the Sherpa,
carried loads up to Camps II, III, and IV
(Camp III being the supply depot exposed
to rockfall). But only Wiessner seemed
capable of leading. With the exception of a
few hundred feet of steps chopped in snow
and ice above Camp II by Pasang Kikuli,
Wiessner led every pitch from base camp
to House’s Chimney. That inequality would
persist through the rest of the expedition:
from Camp IV through Camp IX and even
higher, Wiessner led every single foot of
new ground.
Just how incredible a performance that was
is hard to grasp. When I’ve been at my
fittest, I’ve been on expeditions where I did
a lot of the leading. But never anything like
every foot of the route—except for my solo
attempt on the north side of Everest in
1993, when I reached 25,000 feet.
Breaking trail in deep snow is one of the
most exhausting chores in mountaineering,
even on Mount Rainier, let alone on an
8,000er. Normally you’re only too glad to
turn the job over to a teammate after you’ve
plowed a few hundred feet upward. From
the Bottleneck to the summit of K2 in 1992,
Scott, Charley, and I regularly swapped
leads because of the exhausting snow
conditions.
In 1939, Wiessner didn’t take the lead time
and again out of some egomaniacal need
to be in the vanguard. The problem was
simply that nobody else was up to the job.
Yet in K2: The 1939 Tragedy, Kauffman
and Putnam take Wiessner to task for
being out front all the time. Their criticism is
founded on an expedition theory that
doesn’t make a lot of sense to me. As they
explain it,
Until recent times … virtually all large
expeditions had an official leader whose
task consisted of coordinating and
supervising major activities from before
departure until return. On any such
expedition, in modern times or earlier, the
leader has by far the most important duties.
But these are usually thankless ones
involving drudgery, hard work, dedication,
and constant attention to detail….
In addition, someone, usually the fittest and
most experienced member of the climbing
team, is selected point man (the military
term), or lead dog (the Eskimo term). This
is the person who takes care of the actual
climbing problems on the mountain. The
expedition leader and deputy cannot be
expected to take over the role of point
without seriously endangering the flow of
supplies and support.
Basically, Kauffman and Putnam argue that
the lead climber cannot also be the leader
of the expedition. And so, armed with a
theory whose rationale they never justify,
they insist that in doing exactly that,
Wiessner endangered the whole
expedition:
But Fritz failed to select anyone to serve as
point, and at Base Camp it became
increasingly clear that he was reserving
that position for himself, either because he
didn’t trust his companions’ abilities, or
because he had always been in the habit of
going first….
In short, it was Fritz who had to go first.
And with his heavy personality it was
natural that he would want to be in the
position of making all decisions. Fritz was
also brought up in a culture in which no one
ever questioned the orders of a higher
authority—a far different environment from
that of the New England town meeting.
Well, I’m sorry, but this just doesn’t cut it for
me—even if I ignore that last sneer about
Teutonic culture. There have indeed been
expeditions on which the leader never
intended to go to the summit, choosing
instead to stay in the middle of the pack
and organize logistics. A good example is
the 1953 Everest expedition, whose leader
was John Hunt. Hunt designated four other
climbers to try for the top—Tom Bourdillon
and Charles Evans on the first attempt,
Tenzing and Hillary three days later on the
second. (On the other hand, by his own
admission, Hunt wasn’t in the same league
with those four as a technical climber.)
But on some of the expeditions I most
admire, the man officially in charge of the
assault led from the front all the way. In
1950 on Annapurna, Maurice Herzog was
always out in front, and in some ways he
was also the strongest climber on the
French team. In 1938, Charlie Houston led
from the front all the way to 26,000 feet on
the Abruzzi.
For that matter, David Breashears, the
leader of our 1996 IMAX expedition to
Everest, had a reputation for being a
dictatorial leader. Some people actually
said to me beforehand, “How can you work
with that guy?” But David was always out
front, and he worked harder than anyone
else. I knew when he hired me that he
expected a lot from me. But if you did your
job, you never heard any criticism from
David. That’s leadership: lead by example,
lead from the front, inspire people to follow
your lead. That’s why, despite the
difficulties of our own mission to get the
IMAX camera to the top of Everest while
filming ourselves, and despite getting
caught up in the tragedy that unfolded that
May, our expedition was a success. That’s
why David’s Everest is still the highestgrossing
IMAX film ever made.
In my opinion, a much worse situation
develops when the official leader attempts
to lead from the rear, watching the climbers
through binoculars and ordering their
movements over the radio. It’s all too easy
to sit on your duff at base camp and tell
people up high what they should be doing.
The one time I had to put up with that sort
of nonsense, I felt like radioing back to the
leader, “Hey, dude, why don’t you get your
ass up here and try it yourself?”
Whether or not Wiessner was overbearing
and dictatorial toward his teammates, the
logistical plan he came up with, although it
necessitated a large number of load
carries, strikes me as a brilliant one. Every
camp was to be equipped with three
sleeping bags and air mattresses, as well
as stoves and gasoline and plenty of food.
As Wiessner explained in 1984, “I believe
that if you climb a mountain like this, you
want to be sure, if something goes wrong
or somebody gets ill, you can hold out for at
least two weeks in any camp. If a man had
to come down in very bad weather, he
ought to be able to just fall into a tent, and
everything would be there.”
The problem that developed on the 1939
expedition, starting at Camp IV, was due
almost entirely, I think, to the physical
weakness or psychological
faintheartedness of all the “sahibs” except
Wiessner and Wolfe. On June 21,
Wiessner, Wolfe, Sheldon, and five Sherpa
were established at Camp IV, with plenty of
food and fuel. Wiessner was looking
forward to leading House’s Chimney in the
morning. Instead, a violent storm arrived in
the night. With only a brief lull, the storm
lasted through the next eight days.
At Camp II, 2,200 feet lower, Durrance
guessed that the peak gusts of wind
reached eighty miles an hour. At Camp IV,
temperatures as low as minus 2 degrees
Fahrenheit were recorded. Even Wiessner
was daunted by the conditions. In a 1940
article in The American Alpine Journal, he
would write, “To describe these days and
nights of storm and cold is not within my
power. They were terror-inspiring.”
It was at this point that George Sheldon
seemed to have had his fill of K2. In Camp
IV, he suffered frostnip of the toes. When
the storm finally broke, on June 29, he
descended with three Sherpa, eventually
going all the way to base camp. Sheldon
would make only one more load carry on
the mountain. During the rest of the
expedition, he and Wiessner would not see
each other again.
Meanwhile, on June 30, after nine days at
Camp IV, Wiessner started up House’s
Chimney. The fixed ropes left by the 1938
party had frozen into the slope, and in any
event, Wiessner was not willing to count on
them. (Even in a single year’s worth of
freezing and fraying in the wind, fixed
ropes—especially the old hemp
ones—become dangerously fragile. I’ve
never completely trusted ropes left on
8,000ers by parties from previous years.)
So Wiessner led the pitch the same way his
old partner Bill House had the year before,
and it took him two hours (only half an hour
less) to gain those critical 80 feet. In The
American Alpine Journal article, he later
saluted his friend’s 1938 effort: “I can only
commend House for his ability in having
originally led up this piece of difficult rock
climbing.”
On top of the cliff, Wiessner strung a new
fixed rope. Then, with the aid of strenuous
hauling on the climbing rope, he got both
Pasang Kikuli and Dudley Wolfe up the
chimney. Wiessner was a slight man, wiry
and only five feet six inches tall. Kikuli was
also slight, but Wolfe was a big hulk of a
fellow, and a clumsy climber to boot, so it
must have taken a prodigious effort even
for two men to drag him up the nearly
vertical cliff. The trio pitched Camp V at
22,000 feet, reusing the platforms built up
by the 1938 party. Then they waited out
two more days of storm.
In this way, the team started to fragment.
Down below, the Dartmouth students,
Cranmer and Sheldon, of whom Wiessner
had expected great things, had effectively
thrown in the towel. Cromwell, whom
Wiessner had appointed to the rather
nominal role of deputy leader, had been
intimidated from the start by the difficulty
and the danger of the climbing on the
Abruzzi. Now he declared that under no
condition would he go above Camp IV.
Only Durrance, among the American
climbers below Camp V, still had any heart
for the ascent. But he had been hampered
all along by having to use old, lightweight
boots, after a custom-made pair ordered
from a Munich store had failed to arrive.
When the new boots finally made their
surprise appearance, carried up to base
camp along with the mail by porters from
Askole, Durrance was overjoyed. But
thereafter, despite numerous attempts, he
found it impossible to acclimatize. Even at
only 20,000 feet, he would have to stop and
pant desperately, crouched over with his
hands on his knees. During the rest of the
expedition, he would never climb higher
than 600 feet above Camp VI, which was at
23,400 feet, below the Black Pyramid.
On our own K2 expedition in 1992, we had
team members who seemed to lose heart
for the project after they’d been on the
mountain for a month. It’s all too easy to let
one’s initial gung-ho enthusiasm evaporate
in the face of storms and setbacks. In its
place, a powerful longing to get the hell out
of there and head for home takes over.
That’s why I’ve always (and especially on
K2) psyched myself up beforehand, to the
point where I was willing to spend as long
as it took on the mountain to get a chance
to climb it. By June 30, the 1939 team had
been at base camp or above for exactly
one month. Already Sheldon, Cranmer, and
Cromwell were, it seems, ready to go
home, and it would not be long before
Durrance was of the same mind.
So the two halves of the party began to
separate—a disconnection that would have
everything to do with the coming tragedy.
Later, Wiessner would be severely
criticized for allowing a communications
gap to develop between the climbers up
high and those waiting below. Some
“experts” would fault him for not bringing
along radios. But the 1938 team had had
no radios, and it would be several years
before these devices really became
practical on mountains like K2.
Kauffman and Putnam admit that in 1939,
intercamp radios were both exorbitantly
heavy and unreliable. But they react to
Wiessner’s later statement that he had
chosen to do without radios “for ideological
reasons” with yet another piece of armchair
second-guessing: “Should ideology have
been allowed to play a dominant role in a
life-and-death situation, such as an assault
on the world’s unclimbed, second-highest,
and most formidable mountain?”
The inability or unwillingness of four of the
Americans to climb high put a huge amount
of pressure on the Sherpa. Not only did
they take the brunt of the load hauling, but
as the weeks passed, they moved between
camps more and more while
unaccompanied by any “sahibs.” In 1938,
as much as Houston trusted Pasang Kikuli,
he never let him climb solo between
camps. The Sherpa were always paired
with at least one of the four leading
Americans. Pretty much the same routine
had been the norm on all the British
Everest expeditions since 1922.
In 1939, the Sherpa also became message
carriers. Rather than climb up to a high
camp to confer with Wiessner, Durrance,
since he was unable to acclimatize, would
write a note to the leader and entrust it to a
Sherpa. This sometimes unreliable
communication system created its own
confusion.
To Wiessner, the responsibility of the
climbers lower on the mountain was simple
and obvious: get those camps supplied!
The whole logistical pyramid depended on
a chain of well-stocked camps leading all
the way up the Abruzzi Ridge to the
Shoulder. That makes perfect sense to me,
and I know that if I’d been in Durrance or
Cromwell’s shoes, I’d have done my
damnedest to get those loads up the
mountain. If that’s the agreed-upon plan,
you stick to it. But Kauffman and Putnam,
as well as other critics, fault Wiessner at
this point for not giving clear orders to the
troops in the rear.
What else could Wiessner have done? If he
hadn’t been out front pushing the route,
nobody would have done it. Sheldon and
Cranmer were out of action; Cromwell
refused to go above Camp IV; Durrance
could not adjust to the altitude; and Wolfe,
though game and strong, didn’t have the
skill or nerve to lead.
As they researched K2: The 1939 Tragedy
, Kauffman and Putnam won the trust of
Jack Durrance, who was eighty years old
by the time the book was published. And
they made a great breakthrough when
Durrance let them read and quote from his
1939 diary—a privilege he had granted to
no previous journalist. Those diary entries
add a wealth of new information about the
expedition, and Kauffman and Putnam’s
use of them goes a long way toward
exonerating Durrance from his role as the
villain of the 1939 K2 saga, a view some of
Wiessner’s defenders (and Wiessner
himself) long held.
Yet in many ways, Durrance’s diary only
deepens the mystery of what went wrong
on the mountain. Its passages, which
vacillate between hopefulness and despair,
between enthusiasm and misery, do not
neatly support any of the latter-day theories
about what caused the tragedy. One thing
the diary does document, however, is just
how disheartened and homesick the four
rearguard Americans had become even
before the end of June. On June 26,
Durrance wrote, “The most discussed topic
is what we shall do when once again in
civilization—a week’s stay in
Srinagar—sightseeing in India (Taj Mahal,
etc.).” As Kauffman and Putnam
acknowledge, at this relatively early stage
of the assault, with the scheduled return of
the porters from Askole still almost a month
in the future, “Eyes turned away from the
hardships of K2 and toward the comforts of
home.”
There’s a term some mountaineers use for
this phenomenon. It’s called “crumping.” To
crump is to let the hardship and danger of
expedition life drain you of all your
mountaineering ambitions, so that all you
want to do is get the hell out of there. (It’s
not a piece of jargon I grew up hearing, but
after a climbing friend defined it for me, I
thought it was pretty appropriate.) By the
end of June, the four Americans lower on
the mountain had crumped. It happens a lot
on expeditions. And after crump sets in,
you’ve psychologically thrown in the towel:
you care only about going home, and you’ll
make up all kinds of excuses as to why it
makes sense to hike out early.
Meanwhile, Wiessner, Wolfe, and the best
Sherpa were pushing hard to establish
higher camps. On July 5, carrying heavy
loads, Wiessner, Pasang Kikuli, and Tse
Tendrup placed Camp VI at 23,400 feet.
The next day, Wiessner smoothly led up
through the Black Pyramid to 24,500 feet,
only a 900-foot traverse away from the
slope where the 1938 team had pitched
their highest camp.
As impressive as Wiessner’s leading
virtually every foot of the route was another
of his achievements. After June 21, when
he had established Camp IV just below
House’s Chimney, except for one very
quick trip down to Camp II and back up,
Wiessner would spend twenty-four straight
days at or above 21,500 feet. Most
climbers would simply fall apart under such
a regimen—we all need to descend
regularly on 8,000ers to recuperate at base
camp or slightly higher. The longest
continuous stretch I’ve ever spent above
21,500 feet was ten days on the north side
of Everest. But Wiessner just seemed to
get stronger as he moved higher on K2.
Dudley Wolfe’s performance surprised
almost everyone. He was a clumsy enough
climber that both Cromwell and Durrance
expressed their doubts as to whether he
belonged on the mountain at all. But when
paired with Wiessner, Wolfe kept chugging
upward. He had none of the problems
acclimatizing that so afflicted Durrance, and
up high, he seemed to have none of the
fears that had made Cromwell vow never to
go above Camp IV. Storms and cold fazed
him very little. Wiessner would later
characterize Wolfe as “the most loyal of my
comrades.”
While Wiessner had been pushing the
route up to 24,500 feet on July 5 and 6,
Wolfe had rested in Camp V. Expecting his
teammates to arrive from below with loads
to equip the higher camps, he was first
puzzled, then annoyed when no one
showed up. On each of three consecutive
days, Wolfe climbed down to the top of
House’s Chimney and called out to Camp
IV, only a few hundred feet below. No
answer came. Where was the rest of the
team?
On July 10, Wiessner took matters into his
own hands. Leaving Wolfe and the Sherpa
who had carried loads up high in Camp V,
he dashed solo all the way down to Camp
II—yet another herculean effort. Rallying
his troops and the rest of the Sherpa,
Wiessner got the supply train moving once
more. Two days later, Durrance made his
best effort to go high. With Wolfe,
Wiessner, and two Sherpa, he struggled all
the way up to Camp VI, but only 200 feet
above the tents, he collapsed. With fixed
ropes in place, it was a simple matter for
him to slide back to Camp VI while the
others forged ahead. As Durrance and
Wiessner parted, the leader assumed his
teammate would wait at Camp VI for more
supplies, try to recuperate, and eventually
push higher.
Despite Durrance’s continued problems
with the altitude, Wiessner still considered
him the most skilled of his teammates, and
hoped the two would reach the summit
together. Only gradually did he shift his
plans and substitute Wolfe for Durrance in
the summit party. But the third climber
going for the top would be Pasang Kikuli,
whose talent, experience, and courage
Wiessner deeply admired. Had Wiessner
climbed K2 with a Sherpa, it would have set
a glorious example, one not realized until
1953 on Everest, when John Hunt,
recognizing Tenzing Norgay’s vast
experience and bold ambition, paired him
with Hillary for the May 29 assault.
On July 14, Wiessner led four men—Wolfe,
Tse Tendrup, Pasang Kitar, and Pasang
Lama—all the way up to 25,300 feet, where
they established Camp VIII. The going was
very hard, as Wiessner broke trail through
knee-deep snow covered with an icy crust,
but as usual, he stayed in the lead the
whole day. At last the team had solved the
Abruzzi Ridge and reached the lower edge
of the Shoulder. Wiessner planned to place
one more camp at the upper end of the
Shoulder, at or above 26,000 feet, and go
from there for the top. After so many stormy
spells, the good weather was holding
splendidly.
Thus the stage was set for one of the most
astounding performances in the history of
mountaineering—and for the all-butinexplicable
disaster into which it would
evolve.
Sadly, Pasang Kikuli was no longer at the
front. On the push to Camp VII on July 12,
he had suffered a recurrence of the
frostbite that had first afflicted him on
Nanga Parbat five years earlier. That
evening, he stayed in Camp VI with the
exhausted Durrance.
Having reached the lower edge of the
Shoulder and set up Camp VIII on July 14,
Wiessner sent Tse Tendrup and Pasang
Kitar back down to Camp VII, where the
team had already stockpiled “eleven loads
of supplies.” Staying at Camp VIII were
Wiessner, Wolfe, and Pasang Lama—after
Kikuli, the strongest Sherpa on the
mountain. There followed two days of light
snow as the men rested. Then the weather
turned fine again. On July 17, the three
men set out carrying a tent, their sleeping
bags and air mattresses, and food and fuel
for seven days. Their goal was to establish
a last camp at the upper end of the
Shoulder, then launch the summit bid from
there.
The going was agonizing, thanks to two
days’ worth of new, soft snow that had piled
up on the Shoulder. As he led, Wiessner
sank into the powdery stuff up to his hips.
Only 250 feet out of camp, the trio
approached a bergschrund—a crevasse
where the rocky core of the mountain is
separated from the glacial mass that lies on
top of it. Here the slope steepened, and
though the crevasse itself was crossable on
a snow bridge, the texture of the snow grew
even softer and less stable. The snow
bridge covered a gap of only twenty vertical
feet, but it would take all the strength and
skill Wiessner had to tame it. He would
write in 1956:
After two hours of the hardest conceivable
work I succeeded, almost by swimming, in
getting up across the snow-bridge and then
treading out a belaying stance on the steep
slope above the bridge…. Pasang Lama
followed in my trench but almost
disappeared in the snow before he reached
me; he too needed an hour. Now came
Wolfe, by far the heaviest of us three. He
was not able to master this place and
suggested that he return to Camp VIII, only
100 steps away, and follow us with one or
more of the supporting party the next day,
when the tracks would have become firmer.
As Wolfe returned to Camp VIII, the other
two men continued above, always with
Wiessner breaking trail. Worn out from
floundering in the deep snow, the pair
pitched a temporary camp at 25,700 feet.
The next day they pushed on. Wiessner
had taken careful note of the “great ice cliff”
that hangs over the Bottleneck couloir and
the Shoulder, and he did not like the looks
of it. On July 18, he and Pasang Lama
crossed a field of scattered ice
blocks—avalanche debris that had fallen
from the cliff, the very same serac that
would collapse in 2008. So Wiessner
angled upward toward the left, leaving the
Shoulder as he headed toward a band of
rock cliffs, out of the line of fire of what I
would later call the Motivator. By late that
afternoon, the two men had pitched their
tent on a solid snow platform, protected by
the rock bands above. By Wiessner’s
estimate, they were at 26,050 feet. The
camp was even a little bit higher than our
Camp IV in 1992. Wrote Wiessner later,
“The view from this spot was inconceivably
magnificent.”
By now, he was confident of success. On
July 12, when Durrance had turned back to
Camp VI, he and Wiessner had explicitly
discussed their plans for the following days.
There was no communications gap. As
Wiessner later summarized the plan, “On
July 14 Durrance was to attempt to climb to
Camp VII with four Sherpas and if possible
join us again higher up; in case he should
not feel well he had only to send the
Sherpas on up.” The agreement between
Wiessner and Pasang Kikuli was equally
clear. Since the best Sherpa could no
longer hope to reach the summit, “his wish
now was only to oversee the final support
operations between Camps VI and VII.”
At Camp IX, 2,200 feet below the summit,
Wiessner and Lama had six days of food
and plenty of fuel. Beneath him on the
mountain, Wiessner assumed, was a
continuous string of well-stocked camps,
the logistical pyramid he had designed from
the start.
But things had not gone quite as planned.
Still suffering miserably from the altitude at
Camp VI, Durrance had decided to go
down on July 14. And for some reason, he
took Pasang Kikuli with him, as well as the
other three Sherpa who were supposed to
make critical carries to stock up the camps
above. In the end, Durrance and Kikuli
descended past Camp IV and all the way
down to Camp II. The only concession to
Wiessner’s plan came at Camp IV, where
Durrance dropped off two of the Sherpa
with instructions to ferry loads higher during
the following days.
Durrance’s diary fails to explain why he
took Kikuli down with him. Kauffman and
Putnam interpret the action as springing
from concern over Kikuli’s frostbite. But if
so, why take the other Sherpa down as
well? Even in his demoralized condition,
Durrance must have realized that his
precipitous descent with four Sherpa was
sabotaging Wiessner’s plan.
Why did Kikuli accede to Durrance’s
request? Wiessner drily wrote years later,
“He was unhappy not to be given this job
as planned.” “This job” was to stay at Camp
VI and superintend the ferrying of loads
higher on the mountain. Even though Kikuli
was vastly more experienced than
Durrance, the latter was still a “sahib”—and
Sherpa took orders from sahibs even when
they disagreed with them. But the best
explanation for Kikuli’s heading down is
that Durrance was by now in such bad
shape that the Sherpa may have doubted
whether he could make the trip by himself.
Kauffman and Putnam partially agree:
“Dawa [Thondup] and Kikuli, the latter with
what appeared to be serious frostbite of his
toes, because of which he could not stay
high, had almost carried [Durrance] down
the 2200 feet from Camp IV.”
At Camp II, Durrance found, in Kauffman
and Putnam’s words, “three beaten men
surrounded by unwashed pots and pans
filled with the remnants of a ‘horrible stew
concoction.’ … Rather than touch it, Jack
threw it all out.” One of the three was Tony
Cromwell, the by now almost useless
“deputy leader.”
At Camp IX, of course, Wiessner was
unaware of this breakdown lower on the
mountain. On July 19, he and Pasang
Lama set out at 9:00 A.M., determined to
get to the summit. By today’s standards,
that’s pretty late, but in the 1920s and ‘30s,
nobody realized that the traditional “Alpine
start”—getting off in the wee hours to take
advantage of every daylight minute and of
the predictably better weather in the
morning, a practice regularly observed in
the Alps, the Tetons, and the
Rockies—might also make sense in the
Himalaya and the Karakoram. And given
the primitive clothing of the day—sweaters
instead of down jackets, wool knickers
instead of down pants, single leather
boots—an Alpine start on a peak like K2
probably seemed too cold to contemplate.
On Everest in both 1922 and 1924, no
climber ever got started from a high camp
earlier than 6:30 A.M.
Rather than traverse over to what would
later be called the Bottleneck, menaced
from above by that huge hanging serac,
Wiessner at once tackled the rock cliffs.
The amount of gear the two men carried
puts our modern lightweight summit
attempts to shame. Wiessner hefted a
rucksack packed with pitons, carabiners,
food, and extra clothing. Pasang Lama
carried both men’s pairs of crampons as
well as a sturdy “reserve rope,” threeeighths
of an inch in diameter and an
unimaginable 245 feet in length. The pair
tied in with a 115-foot hemp rope that was
a solid half inch in diameter—much thicker
and heavier than any rope we would use
today.
In light of what happened in August 2008,
Wiessner’s avoidance of the Bottleneck
looks like pretty canny mountaineering
judgment. I suspect, though, that he was
simply a lot more comfortable on rock than
on snow and ice. As a teenager in
Dresden, Wiessner had been part of a
gang that put up what at the time were the
hardest pure rock climbs in the world
(though it would be decades before those
men knew it). In the 1920s in the Alps,
Wiessner’s two great first ascents, on the
Fleischbank and the Furchetta, involved
much more rock climbing than ice work. On
the other hand, Mount Waddington, in
British Columbia, of which Wiessner and
Bill House made the first ascent in 1936, is
a heavily glaciated mountain, some of
whose hardest pitches are on “mixed
ground”—rock interspersed with ice.
Even so, Wiessner evidently
underestimated the difficulty of those rock
bands. No one since 1939 has ever
climbed them again, so it is impossible to
give them an objective rating of difficulty.
For nine hours, Wiessner climbed the rock
bands, hammering in pitons as he went.
Lama belayed him on every pitch. In
succession, Wiessner mastered a short
couloir of black ice, a short overhang of
iced-up rock, and many rope lengths of
shattered, friable rock, much of it covered
with a treacherous skin of ice called
verglas. In the face of several unclimbable
obstacles he backed off, traversing right or
left to find the way. The climbing was so
difficult that Wiessner often had to take off
his mittens to seize holds bare-handed; but
the air was so calm and the temperature
warm enough that he didn’t risk frostbite.
Some of the pitches Wiessner later rated
as sixth class—as hard as anything that
had yet been done in the Alps. All this
above 26,000 feet, without bottled oxygen!
The climbing on those rock bands was
harder by far than anything yet attempted
on Everest, Kangchenjunga, or Nanga
Parbat. It was harder by far than House’s
Chimney or the Black Pyramid. It’s not easy
to judge other people’s climbs, but I’d
venture to say that nothing of comparable
difficulty at such an altitude would be
performed by anybody during the next
nineteen years, until Walter Bonatti and
Carlo Mauri’s brilliant first ascent of
Gasherbrum IV in 1958.
At 6:30 P.M., with the sun nearing the
horizon, Wiessner faced only an easy 25-
foot traverse to the summit snowfield. He
had reached 27,500 feet, only 750 feet
below the summit. The snowfield promised
relatively nontechnical climbing. K2 was in
the bag.
But as he started to move on, Wiessner felt
the rope come tight. He looked down.
Pasang Lama smiled almost apologetically.
“No, sahib, tomorrow,” he said. As a
Buddhist lama, Pasang believed that evil
spirits hovered about the summit of K2 at
night.
For a few moments, Wiessner
contemplated unroping and going for the
top solo. None of the highest mountains in
the world had ever been climbed solo, let
alone on a push through the night. But the
weather was holding perfect, and a nearly
full moon would illuminate the darkness.
Yet he could not abandon his partner. With
a heavy heart, Wiessner turned back. He
knew, however, that he and Lama had
enough gear and food at Camp IX to make
a second attempt the next day or the day
after. As he had climbed the rock bands,
Wiessner had studied the couloir and the
ice cliff to the right. The Bottleneck (as it
would later be named) now looked well
within his capabilities, and the hanging
serac seemed more stable than he had
initially thought. On the next try, Wiessner
would tackle that route, almost all of which
was on snow and ice. It was bound to be
easier than the 1,500 feet of mixed ground
and rock cliffs he had so expertly solved on
this first attempt.
Slowly, as night fell, the men rappeled
down the complicated route, using pitons
Wiessner pounded into the rock for
anchors. “Many times during that descent,”
he later wrote, “I regretted intensely that I
had not insisted on continuing over that last
traverse.”
Wiessner’s admirers over the years have
argued that if anybody could have pushed
on to the summit, reached it after dark, and
descended by moonlight, it would have
been he. But I disagree. If Wiessner had
gone on with Pasang Lama, I think it could
very well have turned into another Mallory
and Irvine—two incredibly bold and
determined climbers vanishing in the mists.
If Wiessner had gone on alone, I don’t think
he would have survived. And left alone on a
small ledge at 27,500 feet, unable to
descend on his own, Pasang Lama would
surely have frozen to death. In turning
back, Wiessner made the right decision.
And in refusing to abandon his partner, he
did the morally responsible thing. I admire
him more for that than if he had reached
the summit.
Even in the gathering night, the conditions
were remarkably benign. It was windless,
and at 27,000 feet Wiessner estimated the
temperature to be between 23 and 27
degrees Fahrenheit. But the descent was
difficult, requiring numerous rappels.
(Although Wiessner never explained how
the two men negotiated the terrain on the
way down, I imagine that their very long
“reserve rope” came in handy.) Pasang
Lama was far less experienced at this sort
of thing than Wiessner, and both men must
have been pretty tired. As the Sherpa
rappelled down an overhang, the rope
running across his back got snagged on the
crampons he carried strapped to the
outside of his pack. With a furious effort,
Lama disentangled the rope, but in the
process he dislodged both pairs of
crampons. Wiessner watched in dismay as
these precious pieces of footgear tumbled
into the void. That fluke mishap would
make a huge difference during the following
days.
The two men reached Camp IX at 2:30
A.M. They had been going for almost
eighteen hours straight. To have
descended 1,500 feet of difficult ground in
the dark without an accident was an
extraordinary achievement in its own right.
Wiessner and Lama slept late and took a
rest day on July 20. The two men were
mildly disappointed that none of the support
party had arrived at Camp IX, but Wiessner
did not yet suspect any serious disruption
of his logistical pyramid. It was so warm in
camp that for hours, Wiessner lay naked on
top of his sleeping bag, taking what he
quaintly called a “sun bath.” Unfazed by his
setback on July 19, he was eager to make
a second attempt the following day. In his
1956 account, Wiessner implied that Lama
was equally psyched: “At three o’clock we
felt fresh again, so that we decided to go to
the summit the next day by the easterly
route. I had no doubt of our success.” But
only two paragraphs later he confessed,
“Since the day before [Pasang Lama] had
no longer been his old self; he had been
living in great fear of the evil spirits,
constantly murmuring prayers, and had lost
his appetite.”
On July 21, the two men got off at 6:00
A.M., a much better start than they had
managed two days earlier. Nowadays
nearly everyone pitches a Camp IV
somewhere directly on the Shoulder. From
there the approach to the Bottleneck is a
straightforward matter of climbing up the
gradually steepening slope. From
Wiessner’s Camp IX, however, a tricky
right-ward traverse across the base of the
rock bands was the first order of business.
If a pair of men are climbing straight up, the
leader can safely belay the second simply
by taking in the rope. On a traverse,
belaying is a much more delicate task. If
Lama, coming second, had fallen off, he
would have taken a wicked pendulum
before the rope came tight to Wiessner. So,
as he led, Wiessner had to place pitons at
the more difficult moves simply to shorten
the length of a potential fall for Pasang
Lama. The traverse took a long time, and
Wiessner described it in his diary as
“disagreeable,” “difficult,” and
“treacherous.”
It was still morning, however, when the two
men reached the bottom of the Bottleneck.
The snow here was so hard-crusted that
Wiessner could not kick steps in it. All at
once the significance of the loss of the
crampons came home to him. As he later
wrote, “With crampons, we could have
practically run up [the couloir], but as it was
we would have had to cut 300 or 400 steps.
At these heights that would have taken
more than a day.” Recognizing the futility of
the task, Wiessner and the loyal Sherpa
turned back to Camp IX once more.
When they arrived at the tent to find that
still no teammates had come up, Wiessner
began at last to suspect that something had
gone wrong. Even so, he felt that there was
still a good chance of climbing K2. Among
the supplies being ferried up the mountain
were spare pairs of crampons. And the
weather was holding perfect.
On July 22, the two men headed down to
Camp VIII. Wiessner’s plan was to pick up
more food and gas and the all-important
extra crampons, then return to Camp IX. If
no crampons had arrived, Wiessner
reasoned, he could borrow Wolfe’s to lead
the hard pitches up high, then drag his
partner up on a tight rope.
Pasang Lama had had enough of the climb,
however, and begged to be replaced in the
summit team by someone else. Wiessner
thought that Wolfe ought to be equal to the
task, or perhaps even Jack Durrance, if he
had at last overcome his altitude problems.
Weissner was so certain of his return to
Camp IX that he left his sleeping bag there,
while Lama carried his own down. Here the
wisdom of Wiessner’s logistical scheme
seemed to pay its dividends in flexibility. On
most Himalayan expeditions to that date,
each climber had carried his own single
sleeping bag up and down the mountain.
But by insisting on stocking each camp with
sleeping bags, Wiessner made it possible,
in theory, for the men to shuttle between
camps at will with only light loads.
On the steeper slopes above Camp VIII,
the loss of the crampons again exacted its
toll, for here Pasang Lama took a fall.
Wiessner described the accident in 1984:
Pasang was behind me. I should have had
him in front, but then I would have had to
explain to him how to cut steps. I had just
got my axe ready to make a few scrapes,
when suddenly he fell off. I noticed
immediately, because he made a funny
little noise. I put myself in position, dug in
as much as possible, and held him on the
rope. If I hadn’t been in good shape, hadn’t
climbed all those 4000-meter peaks in the
Alps, I wouldn’t have had the technique to
hold him.
This account makes Wiessner’s belay
sound almost routine, but it was a
remarkable feat. Even though they were
roped close together, Lama fell, out of
control, down to his partner’s level and an
equal distance beyond before the rope
came tight with a sudden jolt. Many pairs of
climbers the world over have been swept to
their deaths in just such an accident.
Arriving at Camp VIII, Wiessner received a
bad shock: no one had come up from
below. Only Dudley Wolfe was there. The
man was overjoyed to see Wiessner but
was furious at his laggard teammates lower
on the mountain. “Those bastards haven’t
come yet,” he said. Wolfe had run out of
matches two days before, and the only
water he had drunk was a small pool of
snowmelt that he had gathered on a fold of
the tent.
“I cannot understand,” Wiessner wrote in
his diary, “why our Sherpas, [who] had
definitely promised to stock up Camp VIII,
had not come. I also wondered where was
Jack.”
Despite a growing sense of alarm,
Wiessner was still optimistic. Camp VII, a
mere 600 feet lower, had been bountifully
stocked even before the team of five had
pushed on to establish Camp VIII on July
14. Surely at Camp VII the men could pick
up food and fuel and spare crampons, then
head back to Camp IX for yet another
summit bid.
After cooking a hot lunch and “celebrat[ing]
our reunion,” as Wiessner later put it, the
three men headed down. Wolfe carried his
sleeping bag with him, as did Pasang
Lama. For the first time in days, a light fog
had crept in. At first, the trio roped up, with
Lama going first, Wolfe in the middle, and
Wiessner taking up the rear. On a descent
of moderate terrain, it was standard
practice for the most experienced man to
come last, so that he could belay a partner
who might slip. But in the fog, Lama kept
losing his way, veering too far to the east.
(This was exactly what Scott had tended to
do as he led our three-man rope down from
the summit in 1992.) So Wiessner switched
the order, putting himself in the lead and
Lama in the rear.
It was here that Wolfe’s clumsiness nearly
cost all three men their lives. As Wiessner
paused in a precarious position, leaning
forward to chop a step below his feet,
Wolfe accidentally stepped on the rope.
The sudden jerk pulled Wiessner off his
stance, and he started sliding down the
steep slope.
In 1984, Wiessner gave a vivid account of
this near catastrophe:
I immediately called back, “Check me!
Check me!” Nothing happened. Then the
rope came tight to Dudley, and he was
pulled off. The rope tightened to Pasang
behind, and he too came off. We were all
three sliding down, and I got going very fast
and somersaulted.
I had no fear. All I was thinking was, how
stupid this has to happen like this. Here we
are, we can still do the mountain, and we
have to lose out in this silly way and get
killed forever….
But getting pulled around by the somersault
and being first on the rope, it gave me a
little time. I still had my ice axe—I always
keep a sling around my wrist—and just in
that moment the snow got a little softer. I
had my axe ready and worked very hard
with it. With my left hand I got hold of the
rope, and eventually I got a stance, kicked
in quickly, and leaned against the axe.
Then, bang! A fantastic pull came. I was
holding it well, but it tore me down. But at
that time I was a fantastically strong
man—if I had a third of it today I would be
very happy. I stood there and I wanted to
stop that thing. I must have done
everything right, and the luck was there,
too.
In the K2 annals—or, for that matter in the
history of climbing in the Himalaya or the
Karakoram—only Pete Schoening’s
“miracle belay” in 1953 is more legendary
than Wiessner’s self-arrest, which saved
himself and his two teammates. I’d
managed a similar self-arrest in 1992, after
Scott got avalanched off and pulled me with
him. That was tough enough, but there
were only two of us on the rope, not three.
And as big as he was, Scott was not as
heavy as Dudley Wolfe.
As they approached Camp VII, the shaken
men called down to the comrades they
presumed were there, but they got no
answer. It was dark by the time they
arrived. And here the shock became
incomprehensible.
Not only were there no teammates installed
in Camp VII; the tents sagged, with their
doors open. One was full of snow, the other
half-collapsed. All the sleeping bags and air
mattresses were gone. What was left of the
food had been scattered wantonly in the
snow outside the tents. It was as if the
camp had been attacked by vandals. Wrote
Wiessner in his diary, “What had been
going on during the days when we were
high—sabotage? We could not
understand.”
Stunned and exhausted, the men cleaned
out one tent, repitched it, and crawled
inside. In the fall coming down from Camp
VIII, Wolfe had lost his sleeping bag. That
night the three men shared Pasang Lama’s
single bag and air mattress. They endured
a sleepless vigil that, as Wiessner wrote
seventeen years later, “we shall never
forget.”
It is a testament to Wiessner’s indomitable
spirit that even after that wretched night, he
still planned to go back up the mountain
and make a third summit attempt. Surely
there would be food and sleeping bags at
Camp VI, and Wiessner calculated that
there should be at least six Sherpa there as
well. In the morning Pasang Lama and
Wiessner got ready to go. Wolfe had
decided to stay at Camp VII. Wiessner later
explained the trio’s rationale:
With only one sleeping-bag we could not
stay here in Camp VII, so we decided to go
to Camp VI and fetch sleeping-bags from
there. One of us, to be sure, could remain
up here with Pasang’s sleeping-bag, get a
rest, and so spare himself the trip down
and up. Wolfe suggested that he stay, to
recover from the unpleasant night and be in
better shape to take a load to Camp VIII the
day after tomorrow. As leader of the
expedition I, myself, had to go down to
Camp VI to get the support operations
going again and find the explanation of the
unheard-of occurrences. Pasang was to be
relieved.
Later, Wiessner’s harshest critics would
accuse him of abandoning Dudley Wolfe.
Even Kauffman and Putnam, looking back
from their vantage point of fifty-three years
of hindsight, castigate Wiessner on this
question:
The decision now made was to be the
major cause of the ensuing tragedy. Fritz
split his small party….
A cardinal rule of mountaineering,
observed, certainly until recent years, is
that under no circumstances does one split
a small party if one has any reason to
suspect trouble ahead….
Surely this was a time when three
ambulatory men should have stuck
together rather than separate. Indeed, if by
some miracle, all was well below, say at
Camp VI, three backs were surely better
than two or one to help haul up fresh
supplies….
Was this the decision of a leader fully in
command of his faculties?
I don’t know where Kauffman and Putnam
got their “cardinal rules of mountaineering,”
but this analysis, like their theory that the
expedition leader should not be the same
person as the “point man,” seems
cockeyed. If Wolfe was too tired to push
farther down the mountain on July 23, what
was Wiessner supposed to do? Sit and wait
at Camp VII—three men with a single
sleeping bag and air mattress—for help
that would never come? Order Wolfe to
descend, no matter how wiped out he was?
Far from abandoning his teammate,
Wiessner tried to spare him a further
ordeal. It did not seem possible that Camp
VI could have been destroyed as Camp VII
had been. To me, what Wiessner did
seems perfectly logical.
Wiessner and Lama did not depart until
11:00 A.M. on the July 23. And 700 feet
lower, the inconceivable became reality.
Not only were there no Sherpa in Camp VI,
but the two tents had been taken down and
folded up. Some gasoline and a little bit of
food were cached there, but the sleeping
bags and air mattresses were gone.
“Our situation now became very serious,”
Wiessner later wrote. The two men had no
choice but to continue the descent. At
Camps V and IV, still no sleeping bags.
The Camp III depot was empty. At nightfall,
Wiessner and Lama reached Camp II,
which ought to have been the bestprovisioned
on the mountain. No sleeping
bags! Utterly worn out, the two men took
down one tent and wrapped themselves up
in it while they tried to sleep in the other.
Their fingers and toes got frost-nipped, and
for the second night in a row, they got no
sleep.
In the morning, Wiessner and Pasang
Lama staggered down the lower slopes of
the Abruzzi Ridge and at last emerged on
the Godwin Austen Glacier. Base camp
was still several miles away. Wiessner later
wrote, “For the last kilometers on the nearly
level glacier we could only just drag
ourselves along, and often we fell to the
ground.” Finally, with base camp almost in
sight, they saw four tiny figures in the
distance—teammates at last. Slowly the
gap between those figures and the two
utterly spent climbers closed.
This is the great mystery. Why were the
tents stripped? While Wiessner, Pasang
Lama, and Dudley Wolfe were pushing
hard for the summit, what was going on
below Camp VIII? What had happened to
the other four Americans, and to the rest of
the Sherpa?
As the figures on the glacier drew near,
Wiessner recognized Tony Cromwell and
three Sherpa. The first thing Cromwell said
was “Thank God you’re alive!”
By now, with his throat desperately sore
from breathing thin, cold air, Wiessner had
lost his voice, a condition that would last for
weeks. But in a rasping whisper, he
summoned up his fury: “What is the idea?”
Wiessner later recalled his deputy leader’s
explanation: “He told us they had given us
up for dead. He was just out looking for any
sign of anything on the glacier. I said, ‘This
is really an outrage. Wolfe will sue you for
your neglect.’”
In silence, the six men plodded the short
distance to base camp. According to
Wiessner,
The cook and the liaison officer came out
and embraced me and took me to my tent.
Pasang Kikuli and all the Sherpas came
and embraced me. But Durrance didn’t
come for about half an hour.
When he did, I said immediately, “What
happened to our supplies? Who took all the
sleeping bags down? And why were they
taken down?”
Durrance said, “Well, the Sherpas….” It
was blamed on the Sherpas.
Wiessner was surprised to discover that the
two Dartmouth boys, George Sheldon and
Chappell Cranmer, were nowhere to be
seen. It turned out that they had left base
camp on July 18. After seven weeks on the
Godwin Austen Glacier, they were so fed
up with the expedition—or simply
overwhelmed by K2’s challenges—that
they did not even bother to hang around to
find out what was happening with their
three teammates high on the mountain.
The pretext for their early departure: a
geology side trip back to Urdukas, the
pleasant oasis off the side of the lower
Baltoro Glacier! Apparently Cromwell had
given the young men his benediction to
take off.
The porters from Askole had arrived on
schedule on July 23. Now they were
lingering around base camp, eager to go
home. In retrospect, this state of affairs is
surprising. Although Askole was a sevenday
march from base camp for heavily
laden porters, the team had had
intermittent contact with that last outpost of
civilization. On June 28, for instance,
porters had arrived with the mail and
Durrance’s custom-made boots. As the July
23 deadline approached, with the ascent of
the mountain still very much in progress, it
ought to have been possible for Cromwell
to send a messenger to Askole, delaying
the arrival of the porters. After all, in 1938,
the cook and one Sherpa had dashed down
to that village in only three days, as they
organized the team’s firewood-gathering
mission.
In 1992, we waited until we were finally
down the mountain before we ordered our
porters. We did not want to risk having
them arrive before we were sure that our
entire team was done with its attempt.
Once the porters return to base camp, the
expedition is effectively over. That meant
we had to hang around on the Godwin
Austen Glacier longer than we might have
liked—by the end of August, even I was
ready to go home.
The obvious explanation for Cromwell’s
allowing the porters to show up while three
men were still high on K2 is that all the
“sahibs” except Wiessner and Wolfe were
desperate to get the hell out of there.
“Crump” had set in with a vengeance.
Cranmer and Sheldon had not even
bothered to wait for the porters, they were
so eager to leave base camp. It’s a scary
thought, but you can’t help wondering
whether Cromwell, having given up for
dead the three men high on the mountain,
might have pulled the plug on the whole
expedition and started hiking out even
before Wiessner and Pasang Lama got
down to base camp, if he had returned
empty-handed from his July 24 search of
the glacier for signs of the missing men.
Wiessner believed that to be the case. In
1956, with wry irony, he wrote, “At Base
Camp, in the firm conviction that Wolfe,
Pasang and I had perished, it had been
decided to begin the march out on July 25.
This plan had to be altered somewhat when
Pasang Lama and I dragged ourselves into
camp.”
Something very similar to this happened on
the 1963 American Everest expedition. The
goal of team leader Norman Dyhrenfurth,
and of most of the climbers in the nineteenman
party, was simply to make the first
American ascent of the world’s highest
mountain. (In that sense, the ‘63 campaign
was a holdover from the 1950s era of
massive nationalistic expeditions.) That
goal was accomplished on May 1, when
Jim Whittaker topped out with Sherpa
Nawang Gombu. Meanwhile, a small
contingent made up of the best technical
climbers on the team set out to put up a
new route on Everest’s west ridge.
Dyhrenfurth relegated this splinter group to
second-class status, directing all the team’s
logistics and support to the effort on the
traditional South Col route. The west ridge
group had to bide their time and haul their
own loads until Whittaker and Gombu had
succeeded. But by then, Dyhrenfurth and
most of the climbers on the South Col route
were ready to go home.
This rather nasty impasse came to a head
on May 9 in a radio exchange between
Tom Hornbein, installed high on the west
ridge, and Barry Prather at base camp, who
spoke for Dyhrenfurth because the leader
had developed severe laryngitis. In his
classic narrative, Everest: The West Ridge
, Hornbein replays that exchange verbatim
(it had been tape-recorded for use in the
expedition’s documentary film):
Prather: The porters are coming in on the
21st and we’re leaving Base Camp on the
22nd. Over….
Hornbein: O.K., we realize time is running
out but we envisioned that there were a few
more days beyond the 20th or 21st so far
as summit attempts by our route are
concerned…. How do you read that? Over.
Prather: Only comment is, there are 300
porters coming in here on the 21st. Over.
Hornbein: Well, I guess we’ll see you in
Kathmandu then.
In the end, Dyhrenfurth relented and
supported the west ridge party. On May 22,
Hornbein and Willi Unsoeld finished the
route, traversed over the summit, survived
a desperate bivouac above 28,000 feet,
and accomplished a far more impressive
deed than the third ascent of Everest by the
same route that Hillary and Tenzing had
pioneered a decade before. The stellar
British climber Doug Scott later called the
Unsoeld-Hornbein climb the greatest single
feat in Everest history.
At base camp, Wiessner learned for the
first time that Durrance, rather than staying
on at Camp VI, had descended all the way
to Camp II on July 14, taking Pasang Kikuli
with him. After that date, on only a single
day had any of the four Americans
supposedly composing the support team
gone higher than Camp II, at only 19,300
feet. Instead, four Sherpa were the only
climbers stationed between Durrance and
the trio pushing up high from Camp VIII to
Camp IX. During the light two-day storm on
July 15 and 16, Tse Tendrup and Pasang
Kitar had waited at Camp VII. Having
descended to IV with Durrance and Kikuli
on July 14, Tsering and Phinsoo had then
climbed back up to Camp VI to support the
lead climbers.
What happened next is an integral part of
the mystery. In Kauffman and Putnam’s
analysis, “The Sherpas’ instructions, first
from Fritz and then from Jack, were to
continue to ferry supplies whenever
possible, first to Camp VII and then onward
to Camp VIII. They did nothing of the kind;
perhaps they had not understood.”
The only source for the doings of these four
Sherpa between July 15 and 23 is the
discussions they had with the Americans at
base camp after July 24. Most of the
Sherpa spoke Hindustani but not English,
so much of the dialogue had to be
translated by Chandra, an Indian
schoolteacher who had joined the
expedition and the only man conversant in
both tongues. Misunderstandings must
have been rife, and afterward there would
be no way of independently checking the
Sherpa testimony.
Even Wiessner, who was dumbfounded by
the stripping of the camps, eventually
accepted the explanation that emerged
from the base camp dialogue. He would
write in 1956,
On July 17 [Tse] Tendrup and [Pasang]
Kitar, who had waited in Camp VII for better
weather, came down to [VI], instead of
carrying more loads to Camp VII, as I had
arranged. As reason for this change in plan
Tendrup alleged that Wolfe, Pasang Lama,
and I had undoubtedly perished at Camp
VIII in an avalanche. P[h]insoo and Tsering,
however, were not convinced by this
invented story of an avalanche and stayed
on in Camp VI.
Descending farther, all the way to Camp IV,
the next day, Tendrup and Kitar met
Durrance and Kikuli, who were coming up
the mountain. Indignant at their defection,
Kikuli ordered the two Sherpa to return to
the high camps.
Thereupon they climbed back to Camp VI,
where P[h]insoo and Tsering were still
staying, and on July 19 to Camp VII. There
they called up to Camp VIII, which however
was beyond calling range. Since they got
no answer this gave greater probability to
Tendrup’s story of the avalanche; we were
definitely given up. The two of them now
broke up Camp VII, threw most of the
stored supplies into the snow, and left the
tents open. Only the sleeping-bags and air
mattresses were all taken along down to
Camp IV. There Tendrup convinced the
other two Sherpas that his avalanche story
was true, and ordered a descent.
Later on, in Base Camp, the Sherpas called
Tendrup a devil, who had deceived them
with the avalanche story and wanted to
wreck the expedition. I myself suspect that
the strong but often lazy Tendrup was tired
of packing between the high camps and
therefore had invented the avalanche
story…. At the same time he probably
thought the sahibs at Base Camp would
praise him for bringing along the valuable
sleeping-bags from Camps VII and VI.
This explanation, however, leaves all kinds
of questions unanswered. It does not
explain why Camps I through IV were also
stripped. It does not clarify Pasang Kikuli’s
role in the unfolding disaster. And it does
not begin to address the central question of
who bore the ultimate responsibility for
leaving Sherpa in high camps with daunting
and dangerous tasks to perform, in
isolation from all the “sahibs”—a
predicament into which Sherpa had never
been thrust on any previous Himalayan
expedition.
At the moment, sorting out the blunders
that had led to the stripping of the camps
was of secondary importance. The critical
task the men at base camp now faced was
to rescue Dudley Wolfe.
It seems almost beyond belief that after
what could easily have been a fatal
descent, having frostnipped his toes and
completely exhausted himself, and having
seen his logistical pyramid utterly wrecked,
Wiessner still thought there was a chance
to go for the summit. But on July 24, the
very day he got back to base camp, he
wrote in his diary, “The mountain is far
away…. The weather is the best we have
had so far. Will it be possible for me to go
up after a short rest with some Sherpas
and Jack, if he is in shape, to pick up
Dudley and then call on the summit?”
On the one hand, you could call this
determination the hallmark of a great
mountaineer. Getting up K2 meant almost
as much to Wiessner as life itself—as
climbing the Matterhorn had to Whymper,
or Everest to Mallory. On the other hand,
you could call it denial. Wiessner had come
so close to the summit on July 19 that
perhaps he could not accept the fact that it
was now eternally beyond his grasp.
It’s also surprising that at this point, while
trying to recuperate at base camp,
Wiessner told Cromwell to go ahead and
start for Askole with most of the porters.
Granted, the deputy leader had proved
himself useless on the mountain. But faced
with the uncertainty of the rescue, didn’t the
team need every able-bodied climber it had
to offer whatever support it could? If Wolfe
got down the mountain in a crippled state
and had to be carried down the Baltoro by
litter, the team could have used all the
porters available to take turns performing
this desperate evacuation.
It may be that Wiessner was so angry with
Cromwell, he just didn’t want the man
around. And as if to punish him for his
“invented” avalanche story, Wiessner also
ordered Tendrup to hike out with the
porters, further humiliating him among his
brethren. Wiessner kept the rest of the
Sherpa at base camp.
On July 25, Durrance, Phinsoo, Dawa
Thondup, and Pasang Kitar started up the
mountain, hoping to reach Camp VII and
find Wolfe still alive. The four men climbed
to Camp II the first day, to Camp IV the
second. By then, however, Dawa had
developed a painfully sore throat, and
Durrance felt his altitude problems
recurring. Both men decided they could not
go above IV. Durrance asked the other two
Sherpa to push on. Phinsoo was willing, but
Kitar balked, believing (quite reasonably)
that two slightly built Sherpa could not
safely shepherd a possibly stricken man as
big as Wolfe down the Abruzzi Ridge.
Instead, Durrance asked Phinsoo and Kitar
to stay in Camp IV and await
reinforcements. In his diary on July 27,
plucking at desperate straws, he wrote, “I
decided to return to base camp at once
with Dawa & get Fritz & Pasang Kikuli to go
to the rescue.”
Upon the disheartening return of Durrance
and Dawa to base camp, Wiessner
prepared to head up the mountain himself.
But his frostnipped toes and sore throat
had troubled him so much that he had slept
very little, and that day he was able to climb
only a short distance above base camp
before he realized that he was too
debilitated to make another effort to go up
the Abruzzi Ridge. At this point, the sirdar
showed true heroism. As Wiessner wrote in
his diary,
Pasang Kikuli seem[s] to feel in good
shape and his toes seem improved. He
tells me very resolutely that there would be
no need for me in my bad condition to go
up, he would be perfectly able to handle the
situation…. Good luck for me to have a
man like Pasang left, he is dependable and
always does what he plans, I could not do it
better.
Early on July 28, Kikuli and Tsering left
base camp. What happened during the
next six days had to be reconstructed from
the testimony of a single witness.
Despite his frostbitten feet, the sirdar and
his companion were so fit and committed
that they climbed at a rate of almost 1,000
feet an hour—virtually unheard of at such
altitudes. In only six hours they reached
Camp IV, a gain of 5,000 feet. There, to
their surprise, they did not find Kitar and
Phinsoo. It turned out that Kitar had
overcome his doubts and the two Sherpa
left by Durrance at IV had pushed on to
Camp VI. So Kikuli and Tsering pushed on
themselves. In a single day, they climbed
6,900 feet, from base camp at 16,500 feet
to Camp VI at 23,400. Theirs was the
strongest single day’s ascent performed to
that date by any climbers on any 8,000-
meter peak.
From base camp, at 11:00 A.M. on July 29,
through binoculars, Durrance and Wiessner
saw three men climbing a couloir between
Camps VI and VII. They were too far away
to identify, and soon they passed out of
sight. At 5:00 P.M., Durrance and Wiessner
saw three figures descending the same
couloir. It was impossible to deduce what
had gone on.
At noon on July 29, Pasang Kikuli, Phinsoo,
and Kitar reached Camp VII. (Tsering had
been left at Camp VI to prepare hot
beverages.) The three Sherpa found Wolfe
lying in his sleeping bag, completely
apathetic. He did not even read the note
Wiessner had written to him. He had again
run out of matches, and had eaten or drunk
nothing for days. He had not even gone
outside to defecate, so his sleeping bag
and the tent floor were smeared with feces.
The Sherpa made tea for Wolfe, got him
outside the tent, and tried to help him walk,
but he could only stagger. Wolfe told the
men that he needed another day of rest,
and pleaded with them to come back for
him the next day.
Kauffman and Putnam write,
Dudley had spent thirty-eight consecutive
days above 22,000 feet, most of them in a
tent. Of these, sixteen had been at heights
averaging 25,000 feet. In the history of
mountaineering to that time, no man—not
Noel Odell of Everest, not Fritz
himself—has been known to remain at
such heights so long—even with oxygen
support. And few have done it since.
So the three Sherpa turned back and
descended to Camp VI. It is a tribute to
their extraordinary devotion that they still
did not give up on Dudley Wolfe. They
stayed in their tent on July 30, as a minor
storm blew through.
On July 31, Pasang Kikuli, Kitar, and
Phinsoo started up to Camp VII once more.
They again left Tsering behind to brew up
tea for their return.
Tsering waited all day, a pot of tea ready,
but no one came. He waited at Camp VI all
the next day. Finally, on August 2, in a
terrified panic, he dashed down to base
camp.
We will never know what happened on July
31. It may be that the three Sherpa were
avalanched off the mountain between
Camps VI and VII, or that one fell and
pulled the other two off. In 1939, the
survivors thought it was conceivable that
the Sherpa had reached Wolfe and rallied
him into descending, only to have all four
men meet disaster on the way down.
On August 3, with two Sherpa, Wiessner
made one more attempt to ascend the
route. It took him two full days to, as he put
it, “drag myself” up to Camp II. He was
incapable of going higher. On August 5 a
full-scale storm broke, dumping more than
a foot of snow and ending any further
hopes of going up the mountain. Two days
later what was left of the expedition team
started out for Askole.
Dudley Wolfe’s body was discovered on the
Godwin Austen Glacier in 2002. Curiously
enough, ten years earlier we’d stumbled
upon what may have been one of Wolfe’s
hobnailed leather boots, near our base
camp. The boot contained the remnants of
ankle bones and sock material. But in the
aftermath of our rescue of Gary Ball, the
boot somehow got forgotten.
In 2002, two documentary filmmakers from
a Spanish expedition first came across
bones from a leg and a pelvis. That team
was led by Araceli Segarra, who had been
a key member of our IMAX team on
Everest in 1996. Shortly thereafter, the
Spaniards found the remains of a canvas
tent, tent poles, and a cooking pot. The
clincher was a mitten with Wolfe’s name
written on it in capital letters. The discovery
seemed to prove that sometime between
1939 and 1954, the tent at Camp VII, with
Wolfe’s body in it, had been avalanched off
the mountain, and that therefore the three
Sherpa had never reached Camp VII on
July 31 (or had reached it and had once
again failed to persuade Wolfe to descend).
No trace of Pasang Kitar, Phinsoo, or
Pasang Kikuli has ever been found.
On the march out to Srinagar, the
rearguard party—Wiessner, Durrance, and
most of the Sherpa—never caught up to
the Cromwell-Cranmer-Sheldon contingent,
which had joined forces at Askole. In 1984,
Wiessner recalled that hike out:
We were together every day. Durrance
looked after me as if I were a baby. He
made pancakes for me. And every day we
talked. I just couldn’t comprehend what had
happened on the mountain. “I don’t
understand it, Jack,” I told him, “why those
sleeping bags were taken out after all our
agreements.” He kept answering, “It was a
matter of those Sherpas.”
I kept asking him. Finally, he stood there
and shouted, “Ah, Fritz! Stop it! Stop it! We
have talked about it long enough!”
In Srinagar, Wiessner and Durrance
lingered while they painstakingly drafted an
official account of the expedition for the
American Alpine Club. There they were
also interviewed by the American Consul to
India, Edward Miller Groth, who, though not
a mountain climber, prepared his own
analysis of the expedition in a
memorandum addressed not to the AAC
but to the State Department in Washington,
D.C.
It was not until September 20 that Wiessner
and Durrance finally separated, as the
former boarded a ship for New York. On
that day, Durrance wrote in his diary, “Fritz
& I part ways, thank God.”
Tony Cromwell had preceded Wiessner to
the States. Upon disembarking in New
Jersey, Cromwell publicly leveled the
ridiculous charge that Wiessner had
“murdered” Dudley Wolfe. Greeted in New
York by reporters armed with Cromwell’s
claim, Wiessner rashly told the New York
Times that “on big mountains, as in war,
one must expect casualties.”
Wiessner had not recovered from the
ordeal of K2. In New York City he entered a
hospital, where he was bedridden for six
weeks, as doctors treated severe arthritic
problems in his knees and chronic back
pain. Durrance later came to New York,
stayed in a hotel, and sent some of
Wiessner’s belongings to him in the
hospital, but he never paid a visit. The two
men would not meet again for thirty-nine
years.
In his bed, Wiessner brooded about the
stripped camps. He had come to accept
that the removal of sleeping bags from
Camps VI and VII was due to Tendrup’s
false report that the three men above must
have died in an avalanche. But what
explained the stripping of the vital
supplies—including thirteen sleeping
bags—from Camps II and IV? Had
Wiessner found everything in place at
Camp IV, he believed, he could still have
gone back up the mountain and made a
third attempt on the summit. And Dudley
Wolfe would not have died—which would
have meant that the three Sherpa also
would not have died.
As he lay in his hospital bed, rummaging
through his personal papers, Wiessner later
reported, he came across a handwritten
note that he had earlier overlooked. It had
been left for him by Durrance at Camp II on
July 19. The note, as Wiessner recalled,
congratulated him and Wolfe for making the
summit, then explained that he, Durrance,
had ordered the recovery of the sleeping
bags, in anticipation of the expedition’s
departure and to save valuable equipment.
The implication was that Durrance
assumed that Wiessner, Wolfe, and
Pasang Lama would be bringing their own
bags down all the way from Camp IX.
When Wiessner had found this note at
Camp II on July 23, he had been too
exhausted and upset to make sense of it.
Now, in the hospital, it seemed to supply
the missing piece to the puzzle.
Wiessner later wrote that he deposited this
all-important note in the files of the
American Alpine Club. When he
subsequently tried to relocate the note, it
was gone.
In K2: The 1939 Tragedy, Kauffman and
Putnam devote several pages to what they
call the “phantom note.” Phantom, because
no one else ever went on record as having
seen the note. They entertain three
hypotheses. The first is that Durrance did
indeed write the note, and that it was later
lost or destroyed by someone in the AAC.
The second is that Wiessner lied, inventing
the story of the note. But the third goes a
long way toward clearing up the mystery.
The single most important discovery of new
evidence made by Kauffman and Putnam
comes in an entry from Durrance’s diary,
written at Camp II on July 18: “Dawa
danced up here yesterday aft. with notes
from Toni [sic] and Chap: ‘Salvage all the
tents & sleeping bags you can, we have
ample food.’ Easier said than done!”
Nonetheless, Durrance carried out the
command, which surely had come from
Cromwell and not from Cranmer (who had
played no part in the assault since his early
collapse at base camp). The same entry
continues,
Dawa & Pasang [Kikuli] must go aloft and
return rather heavily loaded—meanwhile …
I must pack down 55 lbs. of equipment to
[Camp] I and return to-night. The boys are
more than willing—so that is precisely what
we did. I had some time with my bulky load
alone over several icy places and dodging
stones in the large couloir…. Dawa brought
down 65 lbs. and Pasang 75 lbs. from
above!! We arrived simultaneously. Big
feed!
So the lower camps were indeed stripped
on orders from a “sahib”—but that man was
Cromwell rather than Durrance. The note
Wiessner claimed to have found at Camp II
may well have existed and later been lost in
the AAC files, but if so, on reading it in his
frazzled state, Wiessner had mistaken
Cromwell’s hand for Durrance’s.
The revelation of Durrance’s diary entry still
leaves questions unanswered. Did no one
realize that removing all those sleeping
bags and air mattresses, on which the
climbers up high completely depended,
amounted to (as Wiessner had wondered in
his diary) “sabotage”? Cromwell may well
have been so witless and so eager to head
home that he could issue such a ruthless
demand. But why did Durrance and Pasang
Kikuli obey it? Surely Kikuli, among all the
men on the mountain except Wiessner,
best understood the vital importance of that
chain of camps so well supplied over the
weeks, at the cost of so much labor and
risk. Perhaps, despite the note Durrance
left for Wiessner, by July 18 all three men
had already decided that Wiessner, Wolfe,
and Pasang Lama must be dead—though
the hastiness of such a conclusion defies
credibility.
Kauffman and Putnam argue convincingly
that for the rest of his life, Wiessner, whose
tensions with Durrance had sprung from
the moment they first met in Genoa,
blamed the wrong man for the 1939
tragedy. This itself is curious, since it was
Cromwell who, as soon as he arrived in the
United States, went on the attack and
accused the expedition leader of murdering
Dudley Wolfe.
If Wiessner had fingered the wrong man,
which he did explicitly in his 1956 article in
Appalachia, why did Durrance not spring to
his own defense? A published photocopy of
his July 18 diary entry could have solved
the question for good. Kauffman and
Putnam argue that Durrance was in
essence a private person, and that after the
expedition he was so soured by its
antagonisms that he preferred simply to
ignore the controversy. In any event,
Cromwell lived for forty-eight years after the
expedition, Durrance for fifty-two, without
ever committing to print a single line about
what happened in 1939.
The ill-starred expedition led by Wiessner
had seen the first fatalities ever to take
place on K2. In addition, Wolfe’s death was
the first incurred on any American
expedition to the Himalaya or the
Karakoram. Tragic those losses certainly
were—but the controversy surrounding
them would have quickly faded, had it not
been for the political climate of the day.
Wiessner was still in Srinagar when
Germany invaded Poland on September 1,
and when Britain and France declared war
on Germany two days later. Within climbing
circles, the conservative American and
British disapproval of the great
breakthroughs German and Austrian
climbers were making in the Alps, not only
with their “ironmongery” but with their
apparent willingness to risk all for glory,
had been simmering for most of the
decade.
On October 27, shortly after Wiessner had
returned from India, the AAC launched an
official investigation of the expedition. The
club had never done such a thing before;
nor was it at all a normal procedure. In
1922, seven Sherpa had been killed in an
avalanche on Everest, in an accident that
arguably involved real negligence on the
part of Mallory and his fellow climbers; but
the Alpine Club of London had never
considered launching an inquiry. Cynical
observers would later suggest that had only
Sherpa been killed on K2 in 1939, the AAC
wouldn’t have lifted an eyebrow. But
Dudley Wolfe was a Boston Brahmin, a
blue blood from New England—as were
many of the AAC’s luminaries and officers.
And Fritz Wiessner was a German-
American, at perhaps the worst time in the
twentieth century to be one.
The AAC investigation took months to
complete, since the members of the
committee had such differing views about
assigning blame for the tragedy. The final
draft claimed a disinterested motive: to
“point the way towards a greater control of
the risks undertaken in climbing great
mountains.” But the report came to some
patronizing conclusions. It claimed that the
expedition’s “human administration seems
to have been weak;” that there was “no
clear understanding” of plans between
Durrance and Wiessner when they parted;
that it was an “error in judgment” to leave
Sherpa alone in the middle camps; and that
an ill climber (Wolfe, who was not in fact ill)
should not have been left alone to make his
own decisions. The brunt of all these
criticisms fell on Wiessner. The committee
gave the actions of Durrance and Cromwell
an implicit but total whitewash.
A summary of the report was sent to all
AAC members. In the accompanying letter,
the committee congratulated itself for its
“valuable contribution” in the way of
guidance “if Himalayan expeditions are
undertaken again.”
Charlie Houston had declined to serve on
the committee. But there was no doubt
about his views. On September 28, 1939,
he wrote his old Harvard friend and
Alaskan teammate Bradford Washburn a
letter about the expedition:
I feel as you do about K-2. The report
makes it clear that the party was driven
beyond their powers, extended much to[o]
far along their line of attack, and very
poorly prepared for the very bad luck which
they kept enduring. There is no doubt that
bad luck is far worse when you aren’t
prepared to cope with it.
Wiessner is to blame for most if not all of
the mishap, and I don’t believe I can ever
forgive him. I didn’t know Wolfe, but I knew
and dearly loved Pasang [Kikuli] and
P[h]insoo, and what they so gallantly did,
alone, I can’t forget.
Two members of the AAC committee
strenuously disagreed with the report and
wrote dissenting views. One was Al
Lindley, the strong mountaineer who had
made the second ascent of Mount
McKinley and who had been on board for
the 1939 expedition until, at the last minute,
he’d had to back out. Lindley argued that
Wiessner was being dealt a serious
injustice by the report, for the simple
reason that “the action of the Sherpas and
Durrance in evacuating these camps was
so much the major cause of the accident
that the others are insignificant.” The other
dissent came from Robert Underhill, who,
though a New England blue blood himself,
had applied techniques he had learned in
the Alps to bold first ascents in America.
Underhill’s long rebuttal came to a stirring
conclusion:
What impresses me most is the fact that
thruout all the bad weather, the killing labor
and grievous disappointments, [Wiessner]
still kept up his fighting spirit. Except Wolfe,
the rest of the party were excusably
enough, finished and thru—quite downed
by the circumstances; toward the end they
wanted only to get out and go home.
Wiessner, with Wolfe behind him, was the
only one who still wanted to climb the
mountain. Far be it from me to blame the
others; I know well that if I had been there
myself I should have come to feel exactly
the same way, and probably much sooner.
But this leads me to appreciate Wiessner
the more. He had the guts—and there is no
single thing finer in a climber, or in a man.
Bitterly stung by the report, Wiessner
resigned from the AAC. The most chilling
(and, in retrospect, comically absurd)
episode in the backlash against Wiessner
came only a few months after he was
released from the hospital. Wiessner never
publicly spoke about this confrontation until
1984, when he told a writer about it.
One day [in early 1940] my secretary in my
New York office told me that two men from
the FBI had come by. I went down to the
FBI office and met two very nice young
chaps—they were both Yale graduates. We
sat down and talked. They wanted to know
my whole history, and they had the funniest
questions. Such as, “You go skiing often in
Stowe in the winter, do you not? That’s
very near Canada, isn’t it? Can you get
easily over the border?” I said, “Yes. It’s
quite a distance to walk, but I’m in Canada
very often anyway because I have a
business in Toronto.” And they laughed.
I wasn’t very keen on Roosevelt then. And
so they said, “You don’t like the president?
You made some remarks about him.” I
said, “Well, I wasn’t the only one. There are
very many people who feel that way!” They
laughed again.
They asked about some of my friends. We
sat there half an hour, then we just talked
pleasantly. On the way out I said, “Now
look, fellows, I was pretty open to you. I
have my definite suspicions. Would you tell
me the names of the men who put you up
to this?” They said, “Naturally we can’t do
that.” So I said, “Let me ask this question:
was it some climbers from the AAC?” They
nodded. They said, “Don’t worry about it.
You know who we had here yesterday? We
had Ezio Pinza, the famous opera singer. It
was the same thing, a little jealousy from
his competitors. They complained that he
was a Mussolini follower.”
If Wiessner’s story is true—and it seems
too bizarre for him to have made it up—it
leaves ambiguous the question of whether
his AAC detractors simply wanted to harass
him or genuinely believed he was a Nazi
spy.
Sadly, the criticisms leveled in the AAC
report, full of innuendos attributing
Wiessner’s “mistakes” to his “Teutonic”
style of climbing and leadership, became
the received wisdom about the 1939
expedition. Kauffman and Putnam rescued
from oblivion the memorandum Edward
Groth, the American consul in India, had
sent to the State Department. It is full of
aspersions based on ethnic prejudices. For
instance:
With his German background, also owing to
the fact that he possesses a large share of
German bluntness … it is not remarkable
that there should have been a clash of
temperaments. Wiessner is undoubtedly an
excellent climber and a good leader, but
like every German, he is very forceful in
giving commands and totally unaware that
the abrupt, blunt manner in which the order
may have been given might have wounded
the feelings of his associates, who in this
instance, being Americans, naturally have a
different attitude and outlook in matters of
this sort.
At its worst, the second-guessing took the
form of outright condemnation. In Abode of
Snow, a widely read history of Himalayan
climbing, the British writer Kenneth Mason
gave an utterly garbled summary of the
events on K2 in 1939, concluding, “It is
difficult to record in temperate language the
folly of this enterprise.”
For the most part, Wiessner ignored these
criticisms and got on with his life. In 1955,
however, he published a very small book
about the expedition in German, titled K2:
Tragodien und Sieg am Zweithochsten
Berg der Erde (K2: Tragedy and Victory on
the Second-Highest Mountain in the
World). Miriam Underhill, Robert Underhill’s
wife, the finest American woman climber of
her day and the editor of Appalachia,
persuaded Wiessner to allow the
publication of an English translation of the
part of the text that covered events on the
mountain between July 9 and August 7.
Underhill’s introduction ended with a
challenge: “If any other member of the
expedition disagrees with Mr. Wiessner in
any respect, and will send us his version of
the matter, we should be very glad to print
it.” No one responded.
That text for the first time lays out
Wiessner’s version of the stripping of the
camps and makes it clear that this
dismantling was what wrecked the
expedition and led indirectly to the deaths
of Wolfe and the three Sherpa. In a single
sentence, Wiessner summed up the
personal impact of the tragedy. Had he and
Pasang Lama found sleeping bags at
Camp IV, he insists, he and Wolfe might
have been able “to resume our final attack
on the summit of which I felt so confident.”
Instead, “a cruel fate determined otherwise,
and therewith ended the hardest fight, the
greatest hope, and at the same time the
greatest disappointment of my climbing
career.”
As few mountaineers ever do, Wiessner
kept climbing at a very high level into his
seventies and even early eighties, though
he turned his talents away from the big
ranges and toward rock climbing on smaller
crags. Never again did he go on an
expedition to the Karakoram or the
Himalaya.
Beginning in the 1960s, and accelerating
through the ‘70s and ‘80s, American
climbing underwent a cultural revolution. A
new generation, reexamining the 1939
expedition, saw armchair critics such as
Kenneth Mason as reactionary old fogeys,
while Wiessner was in effect reborn as one
of the greatest climbers in history, his
deeds on K2 considered heroic rather than
foolish or neglectful.
In In the Throne Room of the Mountain
Gods, Galen Rowell pithily summed up this
reevaluation:
Leaders don’t belong in the first summit
team? What about Maurice Herzog on
Annapurna? Sherpas must not move
unsupervised over difficult terrain? What
about the repeated instances on many of
the hallowed British attempts on Everest?
Mountain summits aren’t worth risking lives
for? Only a rare windless night on May 22,
1963, kept four Americans from perishing in
an open bivouac near the top of Mount
Everest…. Taking a climber of Wolfe’s
meager experience on a big mountain was
unprecedented? Andrew Irvine, Mallory’s
famous companion on Mount Everest in
1924, was even less experienced, but like
Wolfe he outperformed those with better
records.
In 1966, Andy Kauffman, Bill Putnam, and
several other AAC members persuaded
Wiessner to rejoin the club. (It would be
decades before Kauffman and Putnam
would turn critical of the man they had so
long admired and championed.) Soon
afterward, in partial expiation of the wrong it
had done him years before, the club made
him an honorary member for life.
In December 1978, the annual AAC
banquet meeting was held in Estes Park,
Colorado. The previous summer, my friend
Jim Wickwire and his three teammates had
become the first Americans to reach the
summit of K2. The whole focus of the
meeting was to be on K2, and Jack
Durrance, who was then living in Denver,
was invited to give a slide show about the
1939 expedition. Hearing about this,
Wiessner flew back from a meeting in
Europe in order to be present.
I wasn’t there, but a friend of mine who was
later recounted for me the dramatic events
that took place. All day long, the rumors
flew that a long-delayed confrontation was
about to occur. Durrance was finally going
to tell “his side” of the story. Meanwhile,
Dee Molenaar, who had been on the 1953
K2 expedition, managed to talk Wiessner
and Durrance into saying hello to each
other. It was the first time they had seen
each other since parting in India in 1939.
The meeting was curt in the extreme.
A number of AAC old-timers took Durrance
aside. They talked him out of making any
inflammatory remarks. Whatever dirty
laundry remained from 1939, they said, this
was not the place to air it. Durrance gave
in. His slide show carried the expedition up
to base camp, then closed abruptly with a
photo of himself in “retirement” in a cabin
near the Tetons.
Later, at the banquet, Wiessner was given
a special toast in recognition of his years of
service to mountaineering. The crowd’s
reaction was deeply emotional, and the
whole assemblage rose to its feet,
applauding wildly—except for Durrance,
who remained seated, his face fixed in a
scowl.
Fritz Wiessner died in 1988, at the age of
eighty-eight. During the last decade of his
life, Kauffman and Putnam interviewed him
at length, as they planned to write his
biography. Their book did not come out
until 1992. For reasons best known to
themselves, the work they published was
not a biography at all but an account of the
1939 expedition that its authors hoped
would be the definitive record.
Kauffman and Putnam did meticulous
research, and they discovered evidence
that no one else had been privy to, such as
Durrance’s diary and Groth’s memorandum
to the State Department. But K2: The 1939
Tragedy was deeply disappointing to
younger climbers who had come to see
Wiessner as a hero. For some, Kauffman
and Putnam’s book verged on a betrayal.
I’m not sure I’d go that far, but it is galling to
see the same old ethnic stereotypes from
the 1930s and ‘40s recycled in the authors’
strictures and interpretations. And it’s
annoying how Kauffman and Putnam sit in
condescending judgment of Wiessner. The
authors were good climbers
themselves—Kauffman was one of the two
men who made the first ascent of
Gasherbrum I in 1958, the only 8,000er
pioneered by Americans. But their smug
second-guessing of an even better climber,
Fritz Wiessner, is hard to swallow. A couple
of examples:
Fritz had a different attitude toward
mountaineering from the others. The
Americans played for fun, Fritz for keeps.
Fritz also adhered to an authoritarian
leadership model, whereas the Americans
had a tradition of independence, even of
rebellion.
On K2 and elsewhere Fritz Wiessner
demonstrated outstanding skill as a
climber. But what can be said of his
leadership on the 1939 K2 expedition? …
Did he treat his companions evenhandedly?
Did he make allowance for the
weaknesses of those less competent than
himself and recognize the perils to which
these weaknesses might expose the
undertaking? Finally, did he overextend his
human resources and, at the critical
moment, rely on luck?
The upshot of K2: The 1939 Tragedy is to
blame Wiessner for much of what went
wrong on the expedition, and even to
implicate him in errors of judgment that led
to the deaths of Dudley Wolfe and the three
Sherpa. As if in counterbalance, Durrance
comes across almost as the hero of the
story, constantly solicitous of the well-being
of his teammates and doing his best to hold
the fragile team together.
It’s hard to understand how these two men,
who, in the 1960s, had the most to do with
rehabilitating Wiessner, who championed
his readmission to the AAC and his
honorary membership, could write a
supposedly “authoritative” account of the
1939 expedition that on almost every other
page makes some sly criticism of the
leader.
A friend of mine who knew Wiessner well
and Putnam fairly well has his theory. He
told me recently, “For years Kauffman and
Putnam spent day after day with Fritz,
recording his memories and listening to him
tell his old war stories. Fritz could be pretty
imperious, and he probably took for granted
that these two guys would hang on his
every word. And when you got Fritz talking
about K2, his bitterness came to the
surface.
“I can imagine that after years of this,
Kauffman and Putnam got a little tired of
Fritz. They may have started resisting
some of the things he told them. And then
they befriended Jack Durrance, and got on
his good side, until Durrance let them read
and quote from his diary. That July 18 entry
was a bombshell—it pretty much disproved
Fritz’s lifelong idea that Durrance was the
villain of the expedition.
“So by the time Kauffman and Putnam
were ready to write, they had lost interest in
doing a biography. But they thought they
had instead the true story of what
happened on one of the most enigmatic
expeditions of all time. And by now,
conveniently enough, Fritz was dead. He
couldn’t answer them from the grave.”
My friend used to be an English professor.
He explained, “This kind of thing happens a
lot in biography. The classic example is
Lawrance Thompson’s bio of Robert Frost.
Frost chose Thompson to be his official
biographer, and he lived so long that the
research covered decades. Frost was
every bit as imperious as Wiessner. There
are stories about how he would call up
Thompson from his retirement home in
Florida and say something like, ‘Come on
down—I’m ready to tell you about 1913.’ By
the time Thompson wrote the biography, he
hated Frost. In that three-volume life, Frost
comes across as a great poet but a
monster in human terms. One reviewer
called it ‘a big fat voodoo doll of a
biography, with Thompson puncturing Frost
from every angle.’ But that’s still the public
image of Frost, which no amount of later
scholarship has been able to undo.”
No matter what the ultimate causes of the
tragedy were, any climber has to be in
complete awe of Wiessner’s performance
on K2. To lead virtually every pitch of the
whole climb, to break trail through the
deepest and softest snow every single day,
to have established a well-stocked series of
camps all the way up the mountain with
only minimal support from his American
teammates, to have used his ax belay and
self-arrest to save the lives of his
teammates twice, to have done the hardest
climbing so far accomplished anywhere at
such an altitude in order to reach a point
only 750 vertical feet below the summit, to
be ready to go through the night to get to
the top—there’s really nothing like it in the
annals of mountaineering in the great
ranges.
And you have to be in awe of the hard
work, the loyalty, and the heroism of the
Sherpa—particularly Pasang Kikuli, Pasang
Kitar, and Phinsoo, who gave their lives
trying to save Dudley Wolfe.
I’ve heard guys say that if Wiessner had
reached the summit of K2 in 1939, with or
without Pasang Lama, it would have been
the greatest accomplishment in
mountaineering history. I agree—but in my
opinion, that feat would have been nearly
impossible. In the years since 1939, such a
tour de force has been performed on rare
occasions, but more often climbers pushing
their limits to such extremes don’t survive
the ordeal.
I get asked all the time whether I think
Mallory and Irvine reached the summit of
Everest in 1924. I always answer, “It
doesn’t matter. It’s irrelevant, because they
didn’t make it back down.” That may sound
a little harsh, but it’s the logical application
of the motto by which I lived during my
pursuit of the fourteen 8,000ers: Reaching
the summit is optional. Getting down is
mandatory.
What really impresses me about Fritz
Wiessner is that, believing that the
achievement of a lifetime was well within
his grasp, tempted to un-rope and go for
the summit alone, he listened to the
terrified plea of his partner and instead
turned back. After K2, Pasang Lama would
go on to become one of the greatest
Sherpa of his generation. He went on many
more Himalayan expeditions, and in 1954
he reached the summit with an Austrian
party on the first ascent of Cho Oyu, the
world’s sixth-highest mountain.
According to Galen Rowell,
In the middle sixties, an American climber
visiting Nepal met Pasang and asked him
about the 1939 expedition. His eyes lit up
as he talked about his friend “Fritz sahib,”
who had saved his life by not forcing him to
continue to the summit…. “Give Fritz sahib
my good wishes,” said Pasang as the
American left.
There is no getting around the fact that
Wiessner agonized for the rest of his life
about the decision he made at 27,500 feet
on July 19, 1939. As he put it in 1984, at
age eighty-four:
If I were in wonderful condition like I was
then, if the place where my man stood was
safe, if the weather was good, if I had a
night coming on like that one, with the
moon and the calm air, if I could see what
was ahead as I did then … then I would
probably unrope and go on alone. But I can
get pretty weak, if I feel that my man will
suffer. He was so afraid, and I liked the
fellow. He was a comrade to me, and he
had done so well.
5
BROTHERHOOD
They say that every adventurer suffers from
the conviction that he was born too late.
When, as a teenager, I read the classic
books of polar exploration—like Robert
Falcon Scott’s diary of his fatal trip to the
south pole or the various books about
Ernest Shackleton’s heroic expedition when
his ship, the Endurance, was trapped in the
ice off Antarctica and sank—I was taken
aback by a recurrent theme: those guys
were sure they’d been born too late. By
1900, there was no western frontier left to
explore, uninhabited by anybody except
Indians; no island in the South Pacific
waiting to be discovered by a Captain
Cook; no source of the Nile still lost in the
blank spaces on the map of Africa. Scott
and Shackle-ton and their rivals wondered
at times whether trying to reach the poles
was too arbitrary a goal. After all, the south
pole was simply a spot on an empty,
windswept glacial plateau, defined not by a
wilderness that could be tamed and settled
but by a unique latitude: ninety degrees
south. Nobody who ever read Scott’s diary
can forget his entry on finally arriving there:
“Great God! this is an awful place.”
But, man! When I read their books, I kept
thinking how lucky they were to be
exploring in the first two decades of the
twentieth century, when nearly all of the
Arctic and the Antarctic was still unknown. I
was sure that it was I who had been born
too late, not Scott or Shackleton. Even the
1950s, when climbers were making the first
ascents of the 8,000-meter peaks, loomed
for me like a lost heyday. Exploration then
seemed simpler, yet more dangerous. Off
you went into some little-known region on
the map, or toward the top of some
unclimbed peak, without being able to send
a word back home. You returned home
months or even years later. Now we have
sat phones, up-to-the-minute weather
forecasts, and online dispatches from the
field. It seems that we’re as much burdened
by technology as we are helped by it, and it
becomes a crutch to make up for missing
skills—just as, for example, the GPS has
replaced the compass.
When, as a teenager, I read Charlie
Houston and Bob Bates’s K2: The Savage
Mountain, I thought how fortunate those
guys were that as late as 1953, the secondhighest
mountain in the world was still
unclimbed. In my mind, there was nothing
arbitrary about that kind of goal. Traveling
by dogsled, you can’t see the north pole
from a distance—you have to be almost on
top of it before you know what it looks like.
Even then, you don’t actually “see” the
pole. You need to make sextant sightings
and triangulate your position before you
can honestly say that you are standing on
or at least reasonably close to the pole.
But I’d “seen” K2 ever since I’d first opened
a book and looked at the famous picture of
it from the 1909 expedition: K2 from Windy
Gap, looking impossibly big and beautiful, a
photo often attributed to Vittorio Sella but
actually taken by the Duke of the Abruzzi
(see photo insert, between pages 150 and
151). Even as a teenager, I understood that
to try to get to the highest windblown point
in that glass-plate picture would take all the
suffering in the world.
By the time I started climbing in 1977, all
fourteen of the highest mountains in the
world had long since been ascended.
(Shishapangma was the last to fall, to the
Chinese in 1964.) All the highest mountains
in Alaska and Canada had been climbed. I
don’t think there was a single summit in the
Cascades of Washington State—my first
stomping grounds—that hadn’t been
reached. It was hard not to feel that I’d
been born too late.
For Whymper, or Mummery, or Mallory, or
even Fritz Wiessner, “mountaineer” was an
unambiguous label. Mallory was the
guiding force on the first three Everest
expeditions, but he was also the best rock
climber of his day in Great Britain.
Wiessner had been one of the best rock
climbers in the world as a teenager, one of
the best alpinists in his twenties, and one of
the best Himalayan climbers in his thirties.
Climbing had yet to be subdivided into
specialized disciplines.
By the 1980s, however, that subdividing
was well under way, and by now it’s
become extreme. Some young rope gun at
Red River Gorge in Kentucky, trying to put
up an 80-foot route that’s rated 5.14c in
difficulty, knows almost nothing about the
Himalaya. And guys who, like me, have
specialized in 8,000-meter peaks know
very little about Red River Gorge, or Hueco
Tanks in Texas, or Mount Charleston in
Nevada. We’re all still “climbers,” but our
fraternities (and sororities) are so
specialized that we scarcely understand
one another’s jargon.
In 2009, there are serious climbers all over
the world who’ve never climbed outdoors.
Instead, they concentrate on artificial walls
in climbing gyms, gearing up for
“comps”—competitions complete with
referees, stopwatches, and “isolation
chambers” (so that one jock doesn’t get the
benefit of watching another try the route of
the day). There’s another whole gang
composed of those who climb outdoors, but
never use ropes. They’re into
“bouldering”—doing the hardest sequences
of moves possible on boulders lying in the
woods. Boulderers rarely get more than 30
feet off the ground, and they’re secured by
buddies spotting them and by springy crash
pads laid out on the ground.
“Sport climbers” use ropes, and tackle
routes ranging from one pitch to a dozen or
more on real cliffs or “crags,” but they rely
for safety on expansion bolts previously
drilled into the rock every six feet or so.
These athletes, like boulderers, are into the
pure pursuit of difficulty, and the risks they
incur are almost nonexistent.
“Trad climbers”—”trad” is for
“traditional”—disdain the connect-the-dots
bolted routes and insist instead on placing
their own protection (“pro,” in the jargon of
the trade), in the form of nuts and cams
wedged into cracks to shorten a potential
fall. These climbers think of themselves as
purists, in touch with the long legacy of
their pastime, and for them risk is a real
issue. If your “pro” isn’t good, a fall can
result in serious injury or even death.
I served my mountaineering apprenticeship
as a trad climber. First at Devils Lake in
Wisconsin with my high school pal Rich
King, and then on more alpine routes in the
Cascades of Washington State, I learned
the basics of rope work, belaying,
rappelling, and placing “pro.” All these skills
would help me immensely when I turned to
the highest peaks in the world.
Trad climbers overlap with “big-wall
climbers,” who work out long routes on
massive cliffs such as El Capitan in
Yosemite. Those routes can take several
days, but there’s also a subgroup of people
who are into doing big routes in the fastest
possible time. On El Cap, every major route
has its speed record, and those times are
coveted prizes for the men and women who
go after them.
I suppose that true mountaineering begins
with “alpine climbing.” Alpine warriors set
their sights on fiendishly difficult routes in
ranges such as the Alps, the Canadian
Rockies, and the Fitz Roy Massif of
Patagonia. Here, “objective
hazards”—everything from avalanches to
falling rocks to storms—play a critical role.
At the cutting edge, alpinism is a very
dangerous sport. (It’s somewhere on this
spectrum that we stop being comfortable
with calling climbing a “sport.” We don’t
know exactly what to call it—a “pastime,” a
“pursuit,” an “adventure”? “Sport” conjures
up baseball or golf. Mountaineering is a
way of life.)
Alpinists are interested in beautiful “lines”
on major mountains, but the height of the
mountain above sea level is pretty
irrelevant. Some of the scariest and most
challenging peaks in the world, like Cerro
Torre in Patagonia, are only about 9,000 or
10,000 feet high. And sometimes climbers
will complete a difficult new route on an
alpine peak but won’t bother to go to the
summit. The route itself becomes the goal.
Finally you get to my group, which we
might call Himalayan or high-altitude
climbers. Even within our coterie, there are
subgroups. There are guys like the
American Steve House, who with one
partner climbed the notorious Rupal Face
on Nanga Parbat alpine-style, but who’s
also done very hard new routes on smaller
peaks in Alaska and Canada. He’s taken
the technical skills he’s honed on lower
peaks and applied them to 8,000ers. I
admire House immensely, but I don’t have
the technical skill or the interest to attack
some unclimbed face in the Great Gorge of
the Ruth Glacier just south of Mount
McKinley. And House has no interest, as
far as I can tell, in climbing all fourteen
8,000ers.
From the start, technical climbing per se
didn’t hold a great appeal for me. I didn’t
ever pursue it seriously enough to know
whether I could have become a top rock
climber. But I loved a physical challenge,
especially if it involved commitment over
the long haul—not just several days but
weeks or months. That’s why, I think, I
gravitated to the 8,000ers, starting with my
first attempt on Everest in 1987. That was a
huge step, but a logical one, beyond Mount
Rainier, where I’d been guiding since 1982.
(Some of my fellow RMI guides also turned
to 8,000-meter peaks, but they were the
exception, not the norm.)
And from the start, I felt instinctively that I
wanted to climb those big mountains in as
pure a style as possible—without the aid of
supplementary oxygen, without the support
of Sherpas hauling my loads, and on
expeditions that I organized myself. When I
go around the country giving slide shows, a
lot of people in the audience assume that
what I called Endeavor 8000—my quest for
all fourteen 8,000ers—was a project I had
formulated from the start. Not so: I was
three or four peaks into the roster before I
could envision a way of completing the
whole cycle. And when Annapurna started
to seem my “nemesis,” as I called it, I
would have been willing to walk away with
only thirteen under my belt.
Of course, it was gratifying to become the
first American to climb all fourteen, and
only the sixth mountaineer in the world to
do so without bottled oxygen. Maybe I
hadn’t been born too late after all! I can
imagine some young guy in, say, 2025
reading about my era in the Himalaya and
the Karakoram and saying to himself,
“Damn it, imagine what it must have been
like when no other American had been on
top of all the 8,000ers. I guess I was born
too late….”
I did gain a fair amount of attention after I
completed the cycle of 8,000ers, appearing
on talk shows such as Charlie Rose, the
Today show, The Colbert Report, and The
Daily Show with Jon Stewart. And my book
about the quest, No Shortcuts to the Top,
generated an unbelievable amount of fan
mail, mostly from nonclimbers. But I was
first surprised, then hurt when I started to
realize that in a certain small portion of the
climbing world, there was a nasty backlash
against my modest celebrity. I’d hear
thirdhand that so-and-so had said, “Big
fucking deal. So Viesturs climbed the
standard route on Cho Oyu. Why doesn’t
he try something new or really difficult?”
Nobody ever said anything quite like that to
my face. So I was sort of left sputtering my
answer into the void. I was tempted to say
to a critic like that, “Okay, dude, why don’t
you try climbing three 8,000ers in two
months.” (That’s what I’d done in 1995.)
I’ve never claimed to be anything I’m not.
I’ve never pretended to be a brilliant rock
climber. And I’ve never put other climbers
down, or denigrated their achievements.
Some of these critics seemed to operate
from a double standard. They’d imply that I
wasn’t a complete climber if I hadn’t done
El Cap or led a 5.13 rock climb. Yet they
themselves had never set foot on an 8,000-
meter peak, let alone climbed one without
supplemental oxygen. I’ve endured risks
and hardships on 8,000ers that some other
climbers could never imagine.
In the past, one climber would applaud
another simply for succeeding, whether it
meant putting up a new route or lending his
face to an ad for an energy bar. We all
pulled for one another to “make it.” A lot of
the more recent sniping and criticism
seems to be based on ignorance, jealousy,
or just having too much free time with
nothing else to do or talk about.
Mountaineering is too wonderful an
endeavor, and too personal a one, you’d
think, to be sullied by petty jealousies and
one-upsmanship. And yet, from its very
earliest years, climbing has been afflicted
with intense competitiveness, and has
generated the kind of controversy and even
mudslinging that, for instance, Wiessner
endured after the 1939 K2 expedition.
To mountaineers of the generations before
mine, making the first ascent of a mountain
was the ultimate accomplishment. The first
ascent of Everest, in 1953, is still far and
away the most celebrated deed in climbing
history. And in my own generation, there
were guys (and gals) who focused their
passions on finding beautiful unclimbed
mountains around the world and figuring
out how to get to the top of them. As the
1980s slid into the ‘90s and then into the
twenty-first century, though, these pioneers
had to head off to more and more remote
ranges—the Tien Shan of western China,
for example, or the high valleys of
Kyrgyzstan, or the glacial massifs of Baffin
Island—to find worthy unclimbed prizes.
That was never my game. In fact, I confess
that I’ve never made a first ascent of a
peak anywhere in the world. On the whole,
I don’t feel that I’ve missed an essential
part of the mountaineering experience by
not having done so. I’ve always thought
that even if I’m on a peak that has been
climbed before, I’m making my own
personal “first ascent.” That’s the intrigue of
adventure—doing something you’ve never
done before.
Yet when I think back to 1953, and imagine
Houston and Bates and their teammates
setting off for K2, full of confidence that at
last they would be the men to make the first
ascent of one of the greatest and hardest
mountains in the world, a little bit of that
teenage envy creeps back. Wouldn’t that
have been a glorious summer to hike up
the Baltoro Glacier? Maybe after all I was
born too late….
From 1939 to 1945, mountaineering pretty
much shut down worldwide. There was
mountain warfare waged in the Alps—the
famous Tenth Mountain Division was
hatched as part of the World War II effort,
enlisting many of the best American
climbers—but scrambling up a steep slope
to attack an enemy entrenched on a rocky
crest is not the same thing as climbing a
great peak “because it is there.”
The few exceptions during the war years
include some extraordinary adventures.
One of the classics of our literature is
Felice Benuzzi’s No Picnic on Mount Kenya
, which I read early on in my own climbing
career. It’s the true story of three Italian
prisoners of war interred in a British camp
in Kenya. From the grounds, every day
they could see Mount Kenya—a 17,058-
foot peak that’s a serious climb, unlike the
more famous Kilimanjaro—towering above
them. In January 1943, they escaped from
the camp just so they could climb the
mountain. They spent eighteen days
working their way up its cliffs and couloirs,
but were defeated short of the summit.
Rather than continue their escape deeper
into the African wilderness, the three men
hiked back to the British camp and turned
themselves in. For their troubles, each of
them spent twenty-eight days in solitary
confinement.
Even after the war, mountaineering was
slow to return to the Himalaya. And the
painful separation of Pakistan from India in
1947 made the Karakoram off-limits to
outsiders for years. It was not until 1950
that the first postwar expedition to any
8,000-meter peak took place.
Charlie Houston had never gotten K2 out of
his blood. For years after the war, he tried
to wangle a permit from the government of
Pakistan. One huge obstacle was that the
battle between India and Pakistan for
control of Kashmir rendered the old
approach route from Srinagar out of the
question for foreigners. Ironically, however,
the same struggle turned the sleepy village
of Skardu into a military outpost, complete
with a modern airstrip. The first postwar
expedition to K2 would not have to hike 360
miles to reach base camp but could fly in to
Skardu—as virtually all expeditions have
done ever since.
Houston was convinced that if Wiessner, at
the head of a very weak team, had been
able to get within 750 vertical feet of the
summit, with only easy terrain above, a
stronger team with far better equipment
would almost surely succeed on the
Abruzzi Ridge. But a permit for K2 seemed
so remote a possibility that Houston applied
instead to Nepal for permission to attempt
Makalu, the world’s fifth-highest mountain.
(It would first be climbed by a French team
led by the great Lionel Terray in 1955.) Yet
even as he was preparing for Makalu,
Houston finally succeeded, with the aid of
the American ambassador to Pakistan, in
winning a permit for K2 for the summer of
1953.
In choosing a team for the 1938 expedition,
Houston had relied on recommendations
from Harvard friends and from colleagues
who were higher-ups in the AAC. For the
1953 expedition, he was determined to put
together not only the strongest team
possible but a group of men who would get
along well together. That was a stroke of
genius. A team made up of members who
like and trust one another will always be
more successful than a team built solely on
the skills of the climbers. So in 1953 the
selection process ended up being more farranging
and democratic but also more
exhaustive than that of any American
mountaineering expedition to that date.
There was no question that Bob Bates
would be on board. Through the war years,
Bates and Houston had stayed the closest
of friends, and Bates was as keen for
another crack at K2 as was his former
Harvard chum. By the summer of 1953,
though, Bates was forty-two years old;
Houston was thirty-nine. That’s not really
old in Himalayan climbing terms, and both
men were in excellent shape. But to round
out the team, Houston and Bates sought
younger men.
The AAC put out a nationwide notice
soliciting applications for the five remaining
slots on the K2 expedition. In the end,
Houston and Bates weighed the credentials
of more than twenty-five candidates. By
1952, Houston had set up a medical
practice in Exeter, New Hampshire. As a
rather draconian requirement for
consideration for K2, he demanded that
every would-be teammate travel (at his own
expense) to Exeter to interview in person
with the leader.
One of the men who was ultimately
accepted was Dee Molenaar, a thirty-fouryear-
old climber with a solid record of first
ascents in the Northwest and the Sierra
Nevada who’d also been on the second
ascent in 1946 of 18,008-foot Mount Saint
Elias, the third-highest peak in Alaska or
Canada. (The first ascent, of course, was
led by the Duke of the Abruzzi way back in
1897.) In the fall of 1952, Molenaar left his
job as climbing ranger on Mount Rainier to
accept a new post in Colorado Springs as
an adviser to the army’s Mountain and Cold
Weather Training Command. A modest
fellow, Molenaar was surprised when
friends urged him to apply for K2.
Dee and I have become really good friends.
No one was more supportive of my efforts
during Endeavor 8000 than he was. A
couple of months after I’d climbed K2, Dee
gave me a typed copy of his own K2 diary
from 1953, with a really warm inscription to
“another Rainier guide who’s gone on to
higher challenges and with great success.”
At the beginning of his typed diary, in an
introduction called “K2 Prelude,” Dee
recalls the tryout process:
I submitted an application, feeling full well
there was really little chance I’d be
accepted, in view of the great number of
other applicants, most younger and “intheir-
prime.” … Also, because Houston and
Bates wanted to personally meet all
applicants before confirming any
choices—and I couldn’t afford a trip East
just to be interviewed and meet them….
But Bob Craig wrote them and supported
my application. And while Craig and I were
[later] working at Camp Drum, NY, I had a
weekend visit with Charlie and Bates in
Exeter, NH, where we hit it off right from
the start.
Out of the Exeter screening process a
legend was born, to the effect that it was
Houston’s dog, a golden retriever named
Honey, that made the final choices. In
2007, Houston admitted to his biographer
Bernadette McDonald, “It’s true that our
dog didn’t like the people we didn’t like. But
that’s as far as it went.” Houston’s wife,
Dorcas, also made sharp appraisals of the
visiting candidates. “She had a very good
feel for quality people,” Houston told
McDonald.
Dee did indeed end up being chosen for
the team without a tryout in Exeter, on the
strong recommendation of his old buddy
and fellow Rainier guide Bob Craig, who
had already been accepted. By 1952, Craig
was a twenty-eight-year-old ski instructor
living in Aspen whose 1946 climbs of Devils
Thumb and Kates Needle on the Alaska-
Canada border already stood as two of the
finest alpine first ascents ever performed by
an American. George Bell, twenty-seven
years old, was a physics professor at
Cornell who had been on major expeditions
to the Andes. Twenty-six-year-old Art
Gilkey, from Iowa, was a geologist who had
done hard routes in the Tetons and glacial
research in Alaska. Pete Schoening, a
chemical engineer, also twenty-six years
old, was probably the strongest climber
chosen for the team. In addition to
numerous first ascents and new routes in
the Cascades, he had been a member of
the 1952 party that made the first ascent of
King Peak in the Yukon, one of the highest
mountains in the remote and massively
glaciated Saint Elias Range.
Houston and Bates meant what they’d said
about valuing the ability to get along above
technical skill and ambition. One of the
candidates for K2 who was rejected was
Fred Beckey. Thirty years old in 1953,
Beckey had a more stellar record of first
ascents all over the United States and
Canada than any other American climber
his age. As a nineteen-year-old in 1942,
with his seventeen-year-old brother as his
only partner, Beckey had made an
astounding second ascent of Mount
Waddington, six years after Fritz Wiessner
and Bill House had made the first ascent. In
1946, Beckey had been the driving force on
Devils Thumb and Kates Needle. On his
first attempt on the soaring granite spire of
the Thumb, Beckey had paired up with Fritz
Wiessner, the only time the two men who
were probably the country’s finest
mountaineers of their day shared a rope.
But on the approach hike, as he thrashed
his way through a fiendish tangle of devil’s
club, Wiessner twisted and badly injured
his knee. He pushed on to the base of the
mountain but had to give up the
attempt—one of the sorest disappointments
of his climbing life. Beckey returned a few
weeks later with Bob Craig and a third
partner and bagged the first ascent.
No matter how strong he was as a climber,
however, Beckey had a reputation as a
headstrong, eccentric man with a quick
temper. Houston never went on record as
to why he turned down Beckey’s
application, but on the Abruzzi Ridge one
day that summer, Pete Schoening would
declare that he wished Beckey had been
chosen for the team.
Still alive and still climbing at age eightysix,
Beckey today has by far the longest
and most distinguished record of first
ascents of previously unclimbed peaks of
any American ever. And his reputation as a
difficult eccentric still clings to him like glue.
I don’t know Beckey, but I’ve always
admired his climbs.
Rounding out the party was Tony Streather,
a twenty-seven-year-old British transport
officer who had spent many years in
Pakistan and India. Like Norman Streatfeild
in 1938, Streather would be invaluable in
hiring and dealing with porters. His only
previous mountaineering expedition had
been with a Norwegian team that in 1950
made the first ascent of 25,289-foot Tirich
Mir, the highest peak in the Hindu Kush,
the range adjoining the Karakoram on the
west. Streather had performed so well that
he had reached the summit with several of
the Norwegians. On K2, he would climb as
an equal with his American teammates.
In Rawalpindi on June 2, the team got
electrifying news over the radio: Everest
had been climbed by Edmund Hillary and
Tenzing Norgay. Many decades later,
Houston would tell Bernadette McDonald,
“It was thrilling news, but, I must confess, I
had a secret unworthy thought that this
would upstage any triumph we might have
in a few more months.” That day, however,
Molenaar wrote in his diary, “Good news to
mountaineers…. Now K2 is the highest
unclimbed mountain. We’re determined to
carry on our plans as before, and without
bottled oxygen, which the Everesters had
used.”
On June 3, the party landed in a DC-3 at
the Skardu airport. In the hour-and-a-half
flight from Rawalpindi, the team had solved
an approach that had taken the 1938 team
two weeks and 220 miles on foot. At the
airport, the climbers were greeted by
cheering Pakistanis carrying banners, one
of which read, “We appeal our American
friends to solve Kashmir Problem.”
In Skardu, the team recruited Balti porters
for the hike in to base camp. They also
hired ten Hunzas, men from mountain
valleys near Gilgit, upstream from Skardu
on the Indus River, to perform as highaltitude
porters. Six of the best Hunzas
were to play the role undertaken by the
Sherpa in 1938 and 1939. In 1953, Sherpa
were unavailable for K2, because Pakistan
would not permit them to enter the country,
thanks to the simmering antagonism with
India. Because the Hunzas were so much
less experienced than the men from Nepal,
Houston and Bates decided that no highaltitude
porter would go above Camp III, at
20,700 feet. On the hike in to Askole,
Molenaar and Craig took time out to run “a
climbing school for 8 Hunzas on a nearby
boulder.”
It took the team seven days, unhindered by
porter strikes, to reach Askole. Before the
expedition, the seven Americans had
known each other other only in
pairs—Houston and Bates had climbed
together, as had Craig and Molenaar, but in
no other pairing had two men shared a
rope, and most of them were strangers. But
as Craig later wrote in the official expedition
account,
As we approached our mountain, the magic
cement that binds men together, the
qualities which make unbreakable
friendships began to form. Unconsciously,
and imperceptibly, we were forming a team.
If we had not it is probable that most of us
would not have survived the troubles that
we were to face.
How sad it is to reflect that that “magic
cement” had been so sorely absent in
1939. On the hike in fourteen years earlier,
the tension between Durrance and
Wiessner had already begun to mount, and
the faintheartedness of Sheldon, Cranmer,
and Cromwell was already seeping to the
surface.
From Askole, it took the team another nine
days to reach base camp. At Urdukas,
where the climbers thought they could
discern the tent platforms hewn out of the
turf by the Duke of the Abruzzi’s party in
1909, they luxuriated in what Craig would
describe as “the last grass we would see
for two months.” The team’s progress,
however, was slowed by threats of porter
strikes, which Streather solved only by
inspired diplomacy. There was also enough
petty stealing—boots and ice axes were the
objects most coveted by the pilferers—that
the Americans began to assign watches
over their camps at night.
All his life, Dee Molenaar has been a gifted
artist and cartographer. On the hike in to
K2, he brought along a watercolor kit, and
while his teammates lolled on their air
mattresses, he painted the surrounding
landscape. (Dee’s drawings and maps
have been adapted for this book—see
pages viii—ix, 217 and the endpapers.) He
also paid attention to the character of his
teammates, as their quirks and habits
slowly revealed themselves. On June 18 he
jotted down thumbnail appraisals in his
diary. He could not have been more
pleased with Houston and Bates:
Charlie: fine leader, excellent humor and
patience, optimistic in most cases.
Bates: hard worker, cheerful, fine humor,
fine organizer, fast walker.
Dee has never been the type to criticize his
teammates, even in the privacy of his diary.
What faint hints of criticism he allowed
himself were tactfully phrased. Of Pete
Schoening, for instance, he wrote, “quiet…
extremely cooperative & hardworking
around camp, worries about porters
somewhat … may tend to make others
uneasy due to constant demand for
‘something to do.’”
On June 20, the team reached base camp
and paid off their 180 porters. They would
return on August 10. In terms of the
calendar, the 1953 team was thus three
weeks behind Wiessner’s 1939 entourage,
which had reached base camp on May 31.
But in allowing fifty-one days before the
return of the porters, Houston’s team
carved out an almost identical span in
which to climb K2 or fail in their attempt.
(That fifty-three days had not been long
enough in 1939 did not seem to give
Houston pause.)
One reason for the 1953 team’s optimism
sprang from the radical improvement
mountaineering gear had undergone during
the previous decade and a half. Now the
climbers had nylon ropes, stretchy and five
times stronger than the hemp or manila
ropes used in the 1930s. They had rubbercleated
Vibram soles on their boots,
instead of the hobnailed leather footgear of
the past. Up high, the men sometimes wore
rubber boots developed for soldiers in the
Korean War. These glorified galoshes
provided great insulation, and for a while
they became popular on expeditions to
really cold mountains. (Climbers started
calling them “Mickey Mouse boots”
because they looked like the black,
oversized feet of the Disney character.)
They’re pretty clumsy, though, for purchase
on rock, and when you strap crampons to
them, they tend to twist off.
The Seattle firm of Eddie Bauer had
custom-made matching red down jackets
for the team, many times warmer and
lighter than the layers of sweaters the
climbers had donned in 1938. (Another link
for me to the 1953 team is that within the
last two years, Eddie Bauer has become
my principal equipment sponsor. That’s sort
of fitting, since my first sleeping bag was a
green Eddie Bauer model I used on Boy
Scout outings.)
The 1953 team also had state-of-the-art
down sleeping bags made in Switzerland,
each one a nesting pair, a smaller inner
tucked inside the larger outer. They were
“always warm,” the men later testified, and
their only drawback was that, weighing
seven pounds, they were hard to compress
and cram inside a pack. Those packs were
of a new steel-and-nylon frame design, far
superior to the shapeless rucksacks of the
1930s. And this time around, Houston had
no objection to bringing scores of pitons,
both rock pins and special ice pitons made
for the team by a friend of Houston and
Bates’s at MIT. (Apparently Houston’s old
disdain for “ironmongery” had softened
over the years.)
Probably the most important gear the 1953
team had that the 1938 team had not was
several lightweight walkie-talkie radios.
Throughout the expedition, the climbers
could usually communicate with base
camp, and often from one camp to another.
(If Wiessner’s party had had such radios, it
is possible that the whole tragedy could
have been averted. Of course the
technology of 1939 had not yet produced
lightweight walkie-talkies.) The 1953 team
also had a Zenith portable radio at base
camp, on which they received the
occasional broadcast from as far away as
Europe and even, several times, the United
States.
The party planned to use, for the most part,
the same campsites they had first
established in 1938, although they were
leery of Camp III, where the rocks kicked
loose from above had torn holes through
the tents and nearly hit three of the men.
There’s one detail in Houston’s account of
camp logistics that I passed right over
when I first read K2: The Savage Mountain
but that on rereading it now gives me
pause. The 1953 team planned to pitch a
Camp VIII somewhere on the Shoulder,
around 26,000 feet. But then, according to
Houston, “somewhere in the rocks less
than a thousand feet from the summit we
hoped to pitch Camp IX, a small bivouac
tent with food for two men for three days.”
Sorry, Charlie, but that idea sounds a bit
odd. Perhaps, though, it derived from how
little the team knew about the mountain
above 26,000 feet. Evidently, in 1953 the
climbers planned not only to follow the
arduous 1,500-foot climb up high-angled
rock and mixed ground by which Wiessner
had made his first attack, but to find a twoman
campsite near the top of it! They knew
how difficult Wiessner had found those rock
bands, and what a good technical climber
he was. Why not opt for the Bottleneck and
the traverse under the hanging ice cliff?
After all, Wiessner had said that if he had
had crampons, he could have “practically
run” up that couloir on his second attempt.
In the 1950s, the thinking in the Himalaya
and the Karakoram was still bound by a
dictum from the 1920s and ‘30s that
insisted that camps on 8,000ers had to be
placed close together. Just a month before
Houston’s team started working its way up
the Abruzzi Ridge, Hillary and Tenzing had
set out for the summit of Everest from a
Camp IX at 27,900 feet. Nobody camps
there nowadays; instead, it’s standard
practice to go for the top from the South
Col, even though, at 26,000 feet, it’s a full
3,000 feet below the summit. Twenty-firstcentury
expeditions place only four camps
on Everest, compared to the nine that were
used in the 1950s. This certainly makes for
longer and harder days, but it drastically
reduces the amount of gear that has to be
carried high on the mountain just to supply
the camps.
Likewise, on K2, Wiessner’s party had
established nine camps. In 1992, we used
only four. Nowadays on K2, nobody camps
higher than the Shoulder, which is 2,200
feet below the summit.
The difference between then and now is
partly logistical—gear is much lighter today,
so loads aren’t so heavy. But it’s mainly
psychological. It took a mental
breakthrough to realize that a party could
climb Everest or K2 with only four camps
above base. It’s actually easier in many
respects, and safer (fewer camps in
precarious places). In 1939, with their
amazing push from base camp to Camp
VI—6,900 feet gained in one day—Pasang
Kikuli and Tsering had proved that such
long nonstop hauls were possible for
climbers in good shape, even without
bottled oxygen. But it would take a while for
an economy of campsites to become
standard operating procedure.
June 21 was Molenaar’s thirty-fifth birthday.
It was not a happy occasion. He was ill and
weak and “wobbly on legs,” as he wrote in
his diary. He wondered if he had contracted
dengue fever, the malady that had probably
been the cause of Petzoldt’s recurrent high
fever in 1938. Dee added, “Very homesick
this evening, wondering how Lee and Patti
[his wife and daughter] are, halfway around
the world. Charlie also admits much of the
same feeling lately; we’re the only ones
with wives and kids.” During the expedition,
Dee would often take out his wallet to look
at the photos of Lee and Patti he kept
there.
On June 27, Bates and Houston set out
from Camp I, at the base of the Abruzzi, to
find the route to Camp II they had
pioneered fifteen years earlier. What must
at the time have been a mortifying
experience, Houston later treated in print
as a comedy of errors:
For the first two hours we climbed steep
scree (loose stone) and snow slopes,
crossing a few little ribs, exclaiming “I
remember this chimney” or “Do you see
that cairn? I’m sure we must be on the old
route.” …
By noon we had to confess that we were
lost.
It would take a second effort the next day,
and much arguing, to work out the route to
the little saddle that Petzoldt had first
discovered in 1938, the site of Camp II at
19,300 feet.
In Bates and Houston’s defense, I have to
say that on the lower slopes of the Abruzzi
Ridge, the terrain is so ill-defined that the
best route is far from obvious. Today, most
climbers follow the tattered remnants of old
fixed ropes, which stand out like flags in a
sea of gray rock and white snow, to solve
the route-finding puzzle of the lower slopes.
At Camp II, the men had a doleful surprise.
They found some tins of jam and
pemmican, rusty with age, some stoves
and a little gas, and “a Logan tent carefully
wrapped and sheltered beneath a
tarpaulin.” These things had been left when
Wiessner and Pasang Lama made their
desperate retreat on July 23, 1939. It was
here that those two shattered men had
wrapped themselves in one tent and lain in
the other through a sleepless night, as they
felt their fingers and toes begin to freeze.
Why they—or someone else—had wrapped
the Logan tent and cached it under a tarp
remains a mystery, since Wiessner never
mentions doing so. Most likely, on his last
effort to go up the mountain to look for
survivors, on August 4, when he managed
only to drag himself to Camp II, Wiessner
had folded up and stashed the tent in
hopes of yet another rescue effort.
Despite such minor setbacks as the routefinding
snafu, the team was getting along
well. “Morale excellent and no frictions in
party,” Dee wrote in his diary on June 26.
But his homesickness only intensified. “I
miss Lee and Patti terribly,” he confessed
on July 2. “No more lengthy, bigtime
expeditions for me!”
In 1939, the Dartmouth boys, George
Sheldon and Chappell Cranmer, had gotten
homesick early on the expedition, and
those base camp blues had apparently
contributed to the “crump” that left them
virtually useless on the mountain. What you
have to admire about Dee Molenaar is that
despite feeling so down only two weeks
after reaching base camp, to the point of
vowing never to go on another major
expedition (in fact, he would not), on K2,
out of commitment to his teammates, he
continued to pull every bit of his share of
the weight, and to care as much as anyone
about trying to get at least two men to the
summit. Only a few days after his
disconsolate birthday diary entry, Dee led a
perilous and poorly protected leftward
traverse, much to the admiration of his
teammates, who nicknamed it “Molenaar’s
Madness.”
On July 7, the climbers reached the site of
the dangerous 1938 Camp III, at 20,700
feet. Intending to use the spot only as a
supply depot, as Wiessner wisely had, the
climbers were startled when Bates, poking
around a corner, found a nook sheltered
from falling rocks by an overhanging cliff. It
was a major effort to excavate two narrow
tent platforms there, but when the men
were done, they had a safe and serviceable
Camp III. (The brunt of the excavating was
done by one of the Hunzas, Hidayat, in “a
furious burst of construction.” Like the
Sherpa, the Hunzas often perform the most
backbreaking work on expeditions, and
often the “sahibs” are only too willing to sit
back and watch them slave away. And
sometimes, at the end of the day, the
Hunzas or Sherpa are simply stronger.)
The next day, the team got more stunning
news, via a radio broadcast received at
base camp and relayed by walkie-talkie up
the mountain. The great Austrian
mountaineer Hermann Buhl had just made
the first ascent of Nanga Parbat, the
world’s ninth-highest mountain, which in the
1930s had cost the lives of so many
Germans, Austrians, and native porters.
And Buhl had reached the summit solo!
The line in Dee’s diary commenting on that
achievement is fascinating, because it
reflects the suspicion that initially clouded
the Austrian’s bold deed. Buhl, Dee wrote,
“evidently sneaked off from the rest of the
party at 3 A.M.”
That was the story propagated by the team
leader, Dr. Karl Herrligkoffer, who has gone
down in mountaineering annals as one of
the most autocratic and spiteful expedition
dictators in Himalayan history. The true
story, which took a long while to emerge,
was that Buhl set out from the team’s high
camp half an hour ahead of his teammate
Otto Kempter, who was feeling weak and
having trouble getting started. Buhl
intended only to break trail until Kempter
could catch up, but his teammate lagged
behind and finally gave up. So Buhl went
on alone, reaching the summit at 7:00 P.M.,
enduring a standing bivouac on the way
down, and later losing toes to frostbite.
Herrligkoffer was the classic example of an
expedition boss who always led from the
rear. Back in Germany, he claimed Buhl
had disobeyed his orders; he even sued his
Austrian teammate. But today,
mountaineers the world over hail Buhl’s
ascent as one of the greatest deeds in
climbing history.
I admire Buhl’s audacity on Nanga Parbat,
but I also think he was lucky to have a mild
enough night to survive his standing
bivouac. A deed such as Buhl’s depends
on walking the fine line between getting
away with a stunning triumph and vanishing
in the mists.
On July 9, the team at last reached Camp
IV, just below House’s Chimney. Here the
discovery of yet more debris from 1939
also posed an apparent puzzle. Along with
what Houston described as “tents reduced
to shreds” and various kinds of food,
including “a large tin of Ovaltine half used
but still in perfect condition after fourteen
years,” the climbers found three sleeping
bags. They were “frozen and filled with ice,”
but the 1953 team eventually thawed them
out and used them to supplement their own
supply of bedding.
Those sleeping bags caused Dee to write
in his diary, “Our impression was that this
was not an ‘evacuated campsite,’ as
described since 1939 by Weissner [sic].”
That’s a provocative remark; it may
ultimately reflect the bad feelings Houston
still harbored toward Wiessner. It implies
that the team wondered whether
Wiessner’s story of his desperate retreat
was a lie. If Wiessner claimed he had gone
down to camp after camp and found them
all stripped of sleeping bags, what were
these three bags doing at Camp IV?
Later Dee came to what was surely the true
explanation. The bags must have been left
by Pasang Kikuli and his Sherpa
companions as they climbed back up the
mountain to try to rescue Dudley Wolfe.
The same day the team reached Camp IV,
Houston, Dee Molenaar, and George Bell
tackled House’s Chimney. Houston had
been thinking about that crux pitch for a
decade and a half. He would write in K2:
The Savage Mountain, with characteristic
self-deprecation:
During the past ten days I had been mulling
over different schemes which would put me
in position to try this lead myself without
being too obviously unfair to my
companions. Now the time had come and I
hesitatingly turned to George and Dee,
both more competent climbers than I.
“Would you fellows mind too much if I tried
to lead this?”
Molenaar and Bell were happy to turn over
the “sharp end” to Houston.
For the first 30 feet I worked on the face,
clutching at tiny holds, and trying not to
appear too clumsy to the experts below.
More by luck and will power than by good
technique, I reached the deep cleft, where I
huffed and puffed, all the while pretending
to get out pitons, adjust the rope, or blow
my nose. The upper section was strenuous,
though not too difficult. With considerable
elation I reached the top finally, and
shouted to the others, “Come on up; I’ve
got you belayed like a house.”
That last line was a sly nod to the 1938
partner who had first led the chimney. And
Houston’s performance must have been
more skillful than he let on, because Dee
recorded in his diary that it had taken only
an hour to lead the pitch—half the time
Wiessner had expended on it in 1939.
At the old Camp V, only 300 feet above the
top of House’s Chimney, the three men
found more relics from 1939. “Another
smashed tent,” wrote Dee, “and letters to
Wolfe—including a bill from some laundry
outfit back home.”
One of the delights of Dee’s diary is that it
captures—as “official” expedition books
rarely do—the homely day-to-day details of
life on a big mountain. A few examples:
Backache again, and slight
headache—restless sleep, due possibly to
Charlie’s irregular snoring through night.
Pete, George, and I took loads and set up
Gerry tent at IV, lay inside for 3.5 hrs,
talking about the Northwest—and
exchanging farts.
Problem here: getting stove started and
keeping it upright. Also, obeying nature’s
calls. We urinate in peanut can, and toss it
out entrance; defecation requires more
guts.
So far, almost everything on the expedition
had gone well. The weather had been
consistently good, as camps were
established and supplies moved steadily up
the mountain. Up to Camp III, the Hunzas
had performed yeoman work. Houston was
tempted to use them higher, but decided
against that tactic, on the grounds that the
men were simply not experienced enough
on difficult terrain. On July 12, as they
started back to base camp, the Hunzas
parted company for good with the
Americans. Wrote Houston later, “Their
early cockiness, bred of ignorance, had
been succeeded by overcautiousness….
After their initial demoralization at Camp I
(and what mountain porters have not gone
through this?), they had performed
splendidly.” As the Hunzas receded into the
distance below Camp III, they shouted out,
“America zindabad!” (“Long live America!”)
and “Pakistan zindabad!”
Pete Schoening, the engineer, had
designed an aluminum A-frame tripod to
which he now attached a pulley. With this
device, pulling on ropes fed through the
pulley, the men hauled many hundreds of
pounds of gear up House’s Chimney. “This
was hard work, and time-consuming,” wrote
Houston. “But it was nowhere near as hard
as carrying loads up the narrow chimney.”
In his diary, Dee crowed, “A-frame big
success!”
Now, however, the weather changed.
Beginning on July 14, it stormed on seven
of the next eleven days. Houston figured
the inevitable delays put the team about a
week behind schedule. But the men’s
spirits plunged with the weather. “Gone
were most of the jokes; the banter had
become more serious,” remembered
Houston. “We were more determined now
than ever, but the picnic was over; the true
struggle had begun.”
It’s always true on expeditions that when
you’re stuck in a tent with nothing to do,
your thoughts turn to food. Houston wittily
recaptured those stormbound vigils:
We read, we slept. Dinners had become
real occasions, because our appetites were
still good (they were to fail higher up) and
considerable ingenuity was usually
exercised by the cook. Sometimes he
added Triscuits to the boiled meat bars, or
fried raisins to the chicken. Sometimes we
had oyster stew (minus the oysters) by
mixing Klim, butter, salt, and tuna fish….
Bates and I had noticed recently that our
companions, heartily sick of our everlasting
reminiscences [of 1938], were now again
showing interest in these memories,
particularly when they involved some of the
epicurean dishes then conceived.
I was amused to discover in Dee’s diary
that everybody’s favorite dessert was Jell-
O. I haven’t taken Jell-O on an expedition
since my attempt on the east face of
Everest in 1988. There, instead of following
the directions on the package, to get a
quick gut-bomb of energy, we would mix
Jell-O or pudding powder with water in a
quart bottle and slug the liquid down before
it set. Jell-O may be a great treat for kids,
but it’s insipidly bland at 20,000 feet, and
waiting for it to firm up seems to take an
eternity.
On July 20, between storms, Bates and
Schoening reconnoitered higher and
reached Camp VI. There they discovered
the most poignant of all the vestiges of the
1939 expedition. Houston described the
scene: “Two tents had been torn to shreds.
A stove, gasoline, and sleeping bags, rolled
and ready to be strapped to the carrying
frames, lay nearby. A small bundle of tea
wrapped in a handkerchief lay inside an
empty stove box beneath the snow.”
On July 31, 1939, Pasang Kikuli, Phinsoo,
and Kitar had set out from Camp VI on their
second attempt to rescue Dudley Wolfe,
leaving Tsering to brew up tea. The
sleeping bags had evidently been rolled up
in anticipation of five men descending the
Abruzzi Ridge. Instead, only Tsering
returned.
Pasang Kikuli and Phinsoo had become
Houston’s dear friends on the 1938
expedition. Fifteen years later, he saluted
them and Kitar movingly: “Whatever their
fate, the history of climbing has no braver
story, no more generous chapter than
theirs. Their sleeping bags, and the
pathetic bundle of tea, were sad reminders
of their courage.”
On July 25, Houston, Craig, and Bell
attacked the Black Pyramid. Bell led most
of the way, across deceptively tricky terrain:
“The rock was solid, steep, polished by
icefalls through ages past. The holds were
small for hands and feet, and often choked
with ice.” But, according to Houston, “Bell
was in his element here.” In 1992 we found
the Black Pyramid a challenging and
exciting break from the rather ill-defined
route work leading up to it. The climbing’s
not extremely difficult, but until we got it
fixed with ropes we were constantly aware
of just how exposed it is.
Unlike 1939, when Wiessner, the only
strong climber, led virtually every step of
the route, in 1953 all eight men—even
Tony Streather—took turns advancing the
team’s push up the Abruzzi Ridge. That
goes a long way toward explaining why
those men bonded together so
harmoniously, and so loyally. I’ve had my
own solid partnerships on 8,000ers, with
guys like Veikka Gustafsson and J.-C.
Lafaille, but I’ve only rarely been on an
expedition in which as many as eight
teammates worked together so smoothly.
That’s an ideal that many teams aspire to
but few achieve.
Camp VII was pitched on a narrow platform
hacked out of a steep snow slope at 24,500
feet. It was so marginal a site that on the
way up the Abruzzi, only one pair of
climbers spent a single night there. But on
July 31, during a cold, windy day,
Schoening and Gilkey broke through and
found a spot for Camp VIII. At 25,500 feet,
it was 800 feet higher than the highest
camp in 1938.
All the way through the Black Pyramid and
up to the lower edge of the Shoulder, the
men placed willow wands every 50 feet or
so to mark their route—as I did in 1992, but
as no one bothered to in 1986 or 2008, an
oversight that contributed to both tragedies.
Arriving after a tough push through
whiteout conditions on August 2, Bates and
Streather found their way to Camp VIII. The
first thing Bates said to his teammates was
“Thank God for your willow wands. We had
no idea where your camp was and couldn’t
see a thing. Your tracks were completely
gone above the ice steps.”
By August 3, all eight climbers were
ensconced in their tents at Camp VIII.
(“Some kind of record for an expedition,”
Dee speculated in his diary.) Houston later
recalled, “Morale was magnificent. We
were in striking distance of the goal. The
summit might still be ours.”
The entries in Dee’s diary are not so
sanguine. The weather during the last ten
days had been remarkably cold. Bates and
Houston kept remarking on how much
colder it was than during the corresponding
weeks in 1938. Korean boots or no, most of
the climbers had felt the nip of incipient
frostbite on their feet. As early as July 25,
Dee wrote, “Our experience with frostbite
also indicates (happily) that we are thinking
more of our fingers and toes than of
reaching the summit. Perhaps the altitude
is affecting our will to push high at any
price.” A few days later: “Worried about
toes. Craig’s are turning white.” Soon Dee
was deeply ambivalent. “I feel alternately
strong,” he wrote on July 31, “with good
‘eager’ days, and then I lose my appetite
for taking chances with the weather and
personally going much higher—willing now
to be in support role rather than attaining
the summit myself.”
Three days earlier, he had voiced an
apprehension in his diary that would prove
uncannily prescient: “Bringing an injured
man down from K2 would be an extremely
difficult, if not impossible, task.”
On July 31, Dee once more jotted down
thumbnail impressions of his teammates
and their current states of mind and body.
“Charlie continues to push ahead as
leader,” he wrote, “although I feel he may
push himself too hard at times…. Gilkey is
strong and quiet, probably the only one
who really wants the summit badly enough
to take a few risks—wants us all to make it
to the top.”
By August 3, however, the team was
reconciled to the likelihood that only two
men might get a chance to go for the
summit. So, democratic to the end, they
held a secret ballot. George Bell and Bob
Craig were chosen for the first summit
team, Pete Schoening and Art Gilkey for
the second.
The men kept telling one another that all
they needed was three consecutive clear
days to give the summit their best shot. But
that day a storm swept in over the
Karakoram. It lasted for seven straight
days. The men sat in their tents, trying to
stay warm, burning their precious fuel, and
eating their dwindling rations. Houston later
recalled the tedium of that vigil:
Someone tightened the guy ropes on all
tents. When we could melt snow, someone
had strength to clean and fill the pots, and
someone else took tea to those in the other
tents. Bob Bates read aloud to us for hours.
Dee Molenaar painted. We all wrote
diaries; my own was now over 200 pages
long.
On August 6, the wind grew so strong that
Houston and Bell’s tent started to rip apart
in the night. The two men gathered up their
belongings, waited for a lull, then made a
dash for the other tents. Houston threw
himself into one shelter, Bell into another.
This meant that two of the team’s
remaining three tents, designed for two
men each, had to hold three.
Day by day, the men watched their hopes
for the summit slip through their fingers.
And then August 7 brought the
unforeseeable event that would cancel
those hopes completely—and turn the
expedition into a survival ordeal.
That day began with optimism, as the
clouds rose, the sky grew brighter, and the
wind diminished. But as Houston would
later write,
We crawled from our tents and stumbled
around like castaways first reaching shore.
As Art Gilkey crawled out to join us, he
collapsed unconscious in the snow. We
rushed to him and he smiled feebly. “I’m all
right, fellows; it’s just my leg, that’s all.”
His teammates half-carried Gilkey back into
his tent. They undressed him so that
Houston, the team doctor, could examine
the leg. “I’ve had this Charley horse for a
couple of days now,” Gilkey said, almost
apologetically. “I thought it would be gone
by now.”
Indeed, Dee’s diary for August 2, five days
earlier, as the men had pushed up to Camp
VIII, notes,
Craig and I roped together with Art during
climb up ice slope, but Art, at lower end of
rope, complained of a “Charley horse,”
untied to keep from slowing us down. But
he kept up with us, following the dragged
end of the rope up the slope to VIII.
Houston knew at once that Gilkey’s ailment
was no Charley horse. The man’s left ankle
was red and swollen. “The diagnosis was
all too clear,” Houston recalled. “Art had
developed thrombophlebitis.”
That diagnosis was deeply puzzling to the
experienced doctor. Blood clots had formed
in Gilkey’s left calf. In the best of
circumstances, he might lose his leg. But
the far greater danger was that as Art
moved around, the clots could break off,
migrate to the lungs, and cause a fatal
embolism, or blockage of a blood vessel.
After wrapping Gilkey’s leg in Ace
bandages and trying to “reassure” him,
Houston went from tent to tent to deliver
the bad news. “I can’t tell you what caused
it,” he told his teammates. “It’s a disease
which usually hits older people, or surgical
patients. I have never heard of it in healthy
young mountaineers.”
Worse luck could hardly have struck the
team. Thrombophlebitis is so rare among
climbers, I’ve never seen a case of it on
any of my thirty expeditions to 8,000ers.
But since Gilkey, we all know that the threat
exists. Long periods of inactivity when
you’re stormbound in a tent can cause the
blood in your legs to clot. And at altitude,
the inevitable dehydration thickens your
blood. It’s common practice nowadays on
8,000ers to take an aspirin a day to keep
your blood thin and, when you’re stuck in a
tent during a long storm, to periodically get
your legs moving to improve circulation.
Houston’s teammates wanted to believe
that Gilkey might simply be out of action for
a few days. Bob Bates asked his best
friend, “How soon will he get better,
Charlie?” Unwilling to burden them with his
darkest thoughts, Houston gave them a
guesstimate of ten days. Then he crawled
back into Gilkey’s tent. He later wrote, “I did
the best I could to explain his condition,
leaving out the complications, taking as
optimistic a note as I could, trying to hide
my awful certainty that he would never
reach Base Camp alive.”
Within the team, Schoening, Molenaar, and
Craig had the most experience in mountain
rescue, so Houston conferred with them
about the chances of getting Gilkey down
the mountain. The men answered that they
thought they could manage such an
extreme task, but, as Houston wrote, “Their
statements lacked conviction.” And:
I did not believe them. I knew, we all knew,
that no one could be carried, lowered, or
dragged down the Black Pyramid, over the
dreadful loose rock to Camp V, down
House’s Chimney…. My mind’s eye flew
over the whole route. There was no hope,
absolutely none. Art was crippled. He
would not recover enough to walk down.
We could not carry him down.
In his diary, Dee wrote a laconic
assessment: “Situation looks desperate.”
As if to mock the team’s ambitions, that
very afternoon the sky in the west started
clearing.
Hopeless the rescue might be, but, in
Houston’s words, “We could try, and we
must.” Gilkey was placed in a sleeping bag,
which was wrapped in a tent, and a
climbing rope was tied to his waist. The first
effort, however, was a complete failure.
The days of storm had loaded the slopes
below camp until they were on the verge of
avalanching. The lowering was inviting
disaster. The men hauled Gilkey only a few
hundreds yards before they gave up.
There was nothing to do but return to
camp. That took an all-out effort. The snow
was too soft and deep for the men to haul
Gilkey uphill, so he had to aid the effort by
making what Houston called “great leaps
with his good leg.”
The next day no one could move, as high
winds tore at the tents, despite the slowly
clearing sky. Gilkey’s condition seemed to
improve slightly. “I’ll be climbing again
tomorrow,” he told Houston, who knew that
this brave promise could never be fulfilled.
By this point, the strongest climbers were
Pete Schoening and Bob Craig. On that
day, August 8, Craig made a bold proposal.
“Charlie,” he said, “what about a dash for
the summit from here?”
“Or maybe we could move two men up to
IX today,” Schoening added. “I’m game.
We might as well do something while we
wait for Art’s leg to get better.”
If Houston was miffed by his teammates’
hunger for the summit, he never said so in
print. And he gave them his blessing to
head upward onto the Shoulder. In the
deep snow, Schoening and Craig managed
only some 400 vertical feet before turning
back. Dee estimated their high point at
25,800 feet. Thanks to Gilkey’s collapse,
the 1953 team failed by some 200 vertical
feet to match the altitude reached by
Houston and Petzoldt in 1938—and by
1,700 feet the high point Wiessner and
Pasang Lama had attained in 1939.
On August 9, the storm returned in full
force. And that morning, to his dismay,
having listened to Gilkey’s “dry, hacking
cough” through the night, Houston
examined his patient and determined that
the blood clots had indeed migrated to his
lungs. Gilkey had a pulmonary embolism.
Houston later wrote in K2: The Savage
Mountain,
This was our lowest time. For the first time I
thought we might all perish here in this
pitiless storm. We would never leave Art;
none of us had even thought of it. But we
could not move him in the storm; indeed,
we could not move ourselves in the storm
of that day.
Dee’s diary entry for August 9 is equally
poignant and honest:
Charlie came by and asked how our morale
was—then informed us that Art probably
wouldn’t last long. My feelings are hard to
put down now. A few moments later, tears
are in all our eyes. (I thought I just heard
Art laugh in his tent.)
Plans change: Terrible thought that
perhaps our getting down safely depends
on Art’s early passing. (God, spare me from
such thoughts!)
Gilkey’s courage through this ordeal was
extraordinary. He told Houston that while
he felt no pain, the nonstop coughing was a
“nuisance.” Houston recalled, “Art said
nothing of himself. He had never talked
about his death, though he was too wise
not to see its imminence. He apologized for
being a burden upon us. He encouraged
us, spoke of another summit attempt—after
we got him down.”
The storm raged on on August 10, but
Houston demanded that the men begin the
rescue effort that day. “What? Move in this
storm?” someone said.
“We’ve got to,” Houston answered. “He’ll
soon be dead if we don’t get him down.”
On August 7, after the abortive first attempt
to evacuate Gilkey, Schoening, and Craig
had gone back out to scout for an
alternative route down, one that might
avoid the avalanche-prone slopes of the
team’s ascent route. They returned with the
news that a steep rock rib just to the west
might serve that purpose. It would take the
team across much more difficult ground,
but it looked to be safe from avalanches.
On August 10, the men packed up for what
Bates would later describe as “the most
dangerous day’s work of [each man’s]
lifetime.” Gilkey was wrapped in a sleeping
bag, with his feet in a rucksack. This
makeshift litter was cradled by a network of
ropes. Four men, each tending a separate
rope—one man above, one below, one on
either side—would try to pull and steer the
immobile victim down the dangerous
ground.
At regular intervals, his teammates knelt
close to Gilkey’s face to ask him how it was
going. “I’m fine,” he answered each time,
managing a wan smile. “Just fine.”
Schoening and Molenaar went ahead to
scout the route—a perilous business, in the
blinding storm. For able-bodied men to
descend in such conditions would have
been bad enough. With the burden of their
helpless invalid, the team faced an almost
impossible struggle. Bates remembered
that day in K2: The Savage Mountain:
The wind and cold seeped insidiously
through our layers of warm clothing so that
by the end of the third hour none of us had
feeling in his toes any longer, and
grotesque icicles hung from our eyebrows,
beards, and mustaches. Goggles froze
over and we continually raised them on our
foreheads in order to see how to handle the
rope. Moving the sick man was frightfully
slow.
After hours of grim effort, however, the men
had lowered Gilkey to the edge of the rock
rib, at about 24,500 feet. Meanwhile,
Schoening and Molenaar had located the
shallow platform in the steep slope that had
served as a dubious Camp VII. Only an
easterly traverse of a mere 450 feet
separated Gilkey from that campsite. But to
haul him horizontally across the icy slope
loomed as the toughest maneuver yet.
Shortly before, Craig had been engulfed in
a small windslab avalanche and had just
managed to keep his purchase. Now he
was so exhausted that he could barely
tighten his crampon straps, so Molenaar
belayed him over to the campsite. There
Craig rested for a while before starting to
enlarge the tent platforms with his ice ax.
Molenaar returned to Gilkey and tied in with
a short hank of rope to the invalid’s waist
loop, hoping to help out in the delicate job
of hauling the litter sideways across the
slope.
The men were strung out across the
dangerously steep terrain in atrocious
conditions. Coming last, Schoening had
plunged his ax in to the hilt behind a small
boulder, using it as an anchor as he looped
the rope around the upper shaft and slowly
fed it out to lower Gilkey. Bell and Streather
were roped together on one rope, Houston
and Bates on another. Molenaar stood
beside Gilkey’s litter, tied in to it close.
As I’ve often commented, when climbers go
to the rescue of someone else, that’s when
they’re most likely to get in trouble
themselves. They take risks they wouldn’t
normally allow themselves, and urgency
and adrenaline drive them to desperate
efforts. On K2 in 1992, Scott and I got
caught in the avalanche that nearly cost us
our lives only because we thought we had
to do everything we could to help Thor
Kieser and the played-out Chantal Mauduit
get down. We’d have never been in that
place in those conditions if we had been
simply climbing from Camp III to Camp IV.
And the slope where we got avalanched
was very close to where Gilkey dangled on
the afternoon of August 10.
It took only a small misstep to trigger the
whole chaotic accident. George Bell, who
had lost all feeling in his feet, began
downclimbing hard ice to aid in the
maneuvering of Gilkey. He slipped, lost his
balance, and started plummeting down the
slope. The rope came tight to Streather and
pulled him off his stance. Streather
frantically tried to self-arrest but couldn’t get
any purchase with the pick of his ax.
As the two men careened out of control
down the mountain, their rope intersected
with that linking Houston and Bates, pulling
it tight. With no time to prepare, first
Houston and then Bates were plucked off
their feet. Four men were now hurtling
toward what seemed certain death. Bates
later wrote, “This is it! I thought as I landed
heavily on my pack. There was nothing I
could do now. We had done our best, but
our best wasn’t good enough. This was the
end…. Only thousands of feet of empty
space separated us from the glacier
below.”
The rope between Bell and Streather next
snagged on the short tie-in between
Molenaar and Gilkey, pulling Molenaar off
his feet with a sudden jerk. Five men were
now plunging in a tangled mess of ropes
toward the 7,000-foot void. And two more
were about to join them.

Dee Molenaar’s watercolor sketch of the
complex accident of August 10, 1953, that
nearly swept seven teammates to their
deaths.
From 60 feet above Gilkey, Schoening saw
what was happening. He threw himself on
top of the ice ax he had jammed behind the
small boulder and hung on to the rope with
all his strength. The jolt came as
Molenaar’s fall started to pull the helpless
Gilkey down the slope. But Schoening held
Gilkey in place, and the short tie-in stopped
Molenaar’s fall.
Only the fact that the jolts came in a
punctuated series kept seven men from
being simultaneously swept to their deaths
off the Abruzzi Ridge. Schoening held on,
clinging to his rope with a death grip, and
one by one, each of the falling men came
to a halt. By the time the chain of events
was over, Bell, the one who had fallen the
farthest, lay 250 feet below Schoening. (
See diagram.)
Pete Schoening’s “miracle belay” has
become a legend. Nothing like it, before or
since, has ever been performed in the
mountains—one man with a single ax and
a grip of steel stopping the otherwise fatal
falls of six teammates and of himself.
Schoening’s deed, which as a superbly
trained climber he performed by instinct in
a split-second reflex, is, simply, the most
famous belay in mountaineering history.
The men were alive. But their predicament
would now drain everyone’s last reserves.
Bell had lost his pack, his glasses, and his
mittens in the fall. As he stumbled, half
blind, up toward his teammates, he yelled,
“My hands are freezing!” Bates and
Molenaar had landed with one on top of the
other, sprawled across a rocky outcrop.
Before they could even guess what had
happened, they heard a cry—probably from
Schoening: “Get your weight off the rope!”
Still holding his belay in that death grip,
Schoening felt his hands starting to freeze,
even with his mittens on.
Bates unroped, climbed down to Bell, and
offered him a spare pair of loosely woven
wool mitts that he had carried in his parka
pocket. Bell’s fingers, already “an ugly fishbelly
white,” were so stiff that he needed
Bates to put the mitts on his hands.
The worst injured was Houston, whose
head had struck a rock, knocking him
unconscious. As Bates cautiously worked
his way toward the “crumpled figure” below
him, he was not sure whether his best
friend was alive or dead. Bates touched
Houston’s shoulder. Houston opened his
eyes, then staggered to his feet. “Where
are we?” he pleaded. “What are we doing
here?”
No amount of explaining from Bates
seemed to penetrate Houston’s fog. He
kept saying, “Where are we?” He had
suffered a bad concussion and lost his
short-term memory. For the rest of his life,
he would be unable to remember the
accident. To motivate his friend, Bates
brought his face close to Houston’s and
ordered, “Charlie, if you ever want to see
Dorcas and Penny [Houston’s wife and
daughter] again, climb up there right now!”
With a belay from Molenaar, relying on
sheer muscle memory, Houston “fairly
swarmed” up the rock-and-ice slope. But
when he arrived at Molenaar’s side, he
repeated, “What are we doing here?”
Much of the team’s gear had been lost in
the fall. The men had only a two-man tent
and a smaller bivouac tent. While one man
tried to hack out a platform in the steep
slope, others set to work frantically pitching
the tents, which the wind threatened to rip
out of their hands. Earlier, Bob Craig, who
had not witnessed the accident, had looked
across the slope to see it swept clean of
climbers. Then he heard Schoening yelling
at him to get an ice ax to anchor Gilkey.
Craig soloed across the traverse and
planted an ax just above Gilkey’s supine
body, then tied it to the rope cradle that
cushioned the man’s makeshift litter. Only
then could Schoening release his hands
from the rope that had stopped everyone’s
fall. At once he headed down toward the
inadequate campsite, for his fingers, like
Bell’s, had begun to freeze.
Craig told Gilkey that the team would return
for him as soon as they got the tents
pitched. Privately, he wondered how the
men, in their newly battered state, would
ever manage to drag their inert teammate
across that dangerous slope. A few
minutes later, Streather planted a second
ax to improve Gilkey’s anchor.
While the men hacked away at their
platform, they heard Gilkey, out of sight
around a small rock rib, call out several
times, but the wind made it impossible for
them to understand what he was saying.
Bates later wrote, “Gilkey sounded as if he
were shouting encouragement, but the
wind blurred his words, as it must have
muffled our answering shouts to him.”
About ten minutes after hearing Gilkey’s
last shout, Bates, Craig, and Streather
roped up and traversed the slope. They
turned the rib and moved cautiously toward
the victim. “What we saw there I shall never
forget,” Bates wrote. “The whole slope was
bare of life. Art Gilkey was gone!”
As they stared at this blankness, the men
noticed a new groove in the ice. The
conclusion was obvious: in the time
between Gilkey’s last shout and the trio’s
arrival to rescue him, an avalanche had
scoured the edge of the rock rib, taking the
helpless victim with it. Even the two
anchoring ice axes were gone. “It was as if
the hand of God had swept him away,”
Bates later wrote.
The three men returned to camp with the
news. As shocking as it was, the team
could not dwell on it, for they still faced the
ordeal of getting through the night. Four
men piled into the two-man tent, with only
one air mattress among them; Bates
opened his sleeping bag and draped it over
the four men like a down comforter. The
other three men were jammed even more
tightly inside the minuscule bivouac tent.
Houston had suffered not only a
concussion but a hemorrhage that blurred
the vision in his right eye, as well as
cracked ribs that made breathing painful.
Molenaar had also cracked his ribs, and
had received a head wound and a deep
gash in his thigh. Bell was sure that both
his hands and his feet were frostbitten, and
he was so myopic that he was virtually
blind without his glasses. Nobody slept all
night.
Houston was out of his head. He became
convinced that he had to cut his way out of
the tent, or else everyone in it would
suffocate. When his teammates physically
restrained him, Houston raved, “Leave me
alone. I’m a doctor, I know about these
things.” Later in the night, as if half-returned
to his senses, he intermittently blurted out,
“How’s Pete?” Bates recalled,
I would say, “He’s all right,” but Charlie
wouldn’t believe me. Then I would call
across to the tiny bivouac tent, which was
swelled to bursting by the three men inside,
“Hey, Pete, tell Charlie you’re all right.”
Pete Schoening would call out, “I’m fine,
Charlie. Don’t worry about me.”
A dozen times that night, Houston
repeated, “How’s Pete?” Then he would lie
quiet for a while, only to cry out, “How’s
Tony?” And even “How’s Art?”
Somehow the men got through the night.
They managed to melt snow and brew up
tea, which they passed from one tent to the
other. The wind dropped, but in the
morning the sky was a leaden gray,
presaging yet another storm. It would take
a dogged effort simply to pack up and start
down the dangerous slopes leading to
Camp VI.
There was not even an ice ax for every
man. The most seriously injured, Houston
was still drifting in and out of reality, so
Schoening and Craig tied him into the
middle of a three-man rope, and
Schoening, coming last, belayed Houston
on every tricky stretch. The team leader
stopped several times, sat down, and, as
Bates observed, “put his chin in his hand,
and looked around as if to say, ‘What are
we doing here?’” Schoening would exhort,
“Come on, Charlie. Let’s go!” Houston
would rise wearily to his feet and continue
the descent.
Though none of them said a word to each
other, each man realized that Gilkey’s
disappearance had probably saved their
own lives. Even more disturbingly, as they
covered the ground below their emergency
Camp VII, the men climbed past splotches
of blood stuck to the snow and the
protruding rocks. None of them mentioned
this grim memento mori until decades later.
But that night, Dee wrote in his diary,
“Enroute down, we passed a tangle of
ropes and torn sleeping bag that had held
Art, with track of blood speckling snow
below, indicating he had died quickly. Poor
Art. We all passed by this wreckage
silently.”
It took the team five days to limp down the
mountain. That they pulled off that descent
without another accident is a tribute not
only to the toughness of those seven men
but to the depth of their solicitude for one
another. Still, when they reached base
camp on August 15, they were a
demoralized crew, with the pall of defeat
heavy on their spirits and the weight of
sorrow over the loss of their teammate
even heavier.
On a small ridge above base camp, the
Hunzas built a rock cairn as a memorial to
Art Gilkey. Over the years since 1953,
plaques commemorating other climbers
who died on K2 have been added to the
cairn. The memorial has become a solemn
shrine for all the expedition members who
place their base camps on the Godwin
Austen Glacier.
I think I was sixteen when I read K2: The
Savage Mountain. I was so impressed by
the story that in a high school class in
expository writing, when the teacher
assigned us to write a play, I wrote about
K2, with the plot revolving around the
dilemma of having to leave somebody
behind on the mountain. What really
inspired me about those guys on the 1953
expedition is how they took care of one
another, how they bonded in adversity.
Later I would realize that there was a kind
of military model for their courage, in the
motto “Leave no man behind.”
But you can’t teach that kind of morality.
Those guys were all selfless by nature.
They all had high ethical standards. I’m
sure their example helped me form my own
moral principles, so that much later, when I
had to put aside my personal ambitions to
go to the aid of another climber in trouble, I
did so without hesitation. I know I couldn’t
live with myself if I didn’t try to help out
when I had the chance.
In 1992, when Scott and I were climbing
above our Camp III toward the Shoulder,
we suddenly realized that we were
traversing the very slope where Schoening
had stopped the interlinked falls of his six
teammates and where Gilkey had been
swept away by the avalanche. We slowed
down as we discussed just how those
events must have unfolded thirty-nine years
before. The slope was self-evidently a
treacherous place, and in that moment, it
came home to us just how hopeless it
would be to try to carry a completely
incapacitated teammate down the
mountain.
Houston was right in that grim passage
about his thoughts after diagnosing Gilkey’s
thrombophlebitis: “There was no hope,
absolutely none. Art was crippled…. We
could not carry him down.” In 1992, we had
gotten Gary Ball, stricken with pulmonary
edema, down that same stretch through the
Black Pyramid. But Gary was still mobile all
the way down to Camp II. We weren’t
lowering him in a makeshift litter, as the
1953 team was with Gilkey. Gary could still
walk, and could hold on to the rope I
anchored, using it like a handrail. It was
only when we arrived at Camp I, at 20,000
feet, that Gary collapsed and became a
litter case. As the American team had with
Gilkey, we then wrapped Gary in a sleeping
bag and lowered him down the snowy
slopes through the night. By that point there
were six of us lowering and another climber
at Gary’s side to steer him onto the right
course.
The only time Pete Schoening wrote about
K2 was in a small booklet, limited to about
a hundred copies and intended only for
close friends, which was published after his
death in 2004. That work, however, reveals
Schoening’s lifelong conviction that the
team could have gotten Gilkey down the
mountain: “It would have taken longer than
descending by ourselves and frostbite
would have been more severe. But based
on experience doing rescues on steep
terrain, I believe we could have done it.”
Whether or not Schoening’s faith in the
team’s rescue capabilities is realistic, I’m
convinced that had Gilkey not collapsed,
the 1953 team would have made the first
ascent of K2. They had been so successful
in getting all eight climbers to 25,500 feet
that I believe that, even with the stretch of
bad weather that began on August 3, they
could have gotten at least two men to the
summit.
I also think the 1953 team was accurate in
their private realization that Gilkey’s death
in the avalanche might have saved their
own lives. Decades after the expedition, a
provocative theory started to circulate in the
mountaineering world, proposed first by
Tom Hornbein, Houston’s friend and the
man who, with Willi Unsoeld, completed the
astonishing first traverse of Everest by the
west ridge in 1963. Hornbein wondered
whether Gilkey, realizing what a fix his
comrades were in after the accident, might
have “taken the opportunity to disconnect
himself from the mountainside to which he
had been secured,” sacrificing himself to
save his teammates.
If Hollywood were to make a movie about
the ‘53 expedition, that would be the
crowning touch, the perfect embodiment of
what Houston would come to call “the
brotherhood of the rope.” His teammates
had briefly speculated about this possibility
shortly after they’d discovered that Gilkey
was gone. But Bates and Houston decided
that it was very unlikely.
I agree with them. First of all, Gilkey was so
swaddled up in his sleeping bag, he might
have found it impossible to free his arms.
And even if he had had a knife, could he
have reached out and cut the rope with it?
If he had, the ice axes anchoring him
should have still been in place when Bates,
Craig, and Streather arrived on the scene.
But the axes vanished with Gilkey.
Alternatively, it’s barely conceivable that
Gilkey could have wrenched the axes loose
with his hands. By then, however, he was
probably too weak to do so, and that
morning Houston had given him a dose of
morphine to dull the pain.
Dee’s diary, written without the benefit of
retrospect, is unequivocal: “After the
wounded were in tents, Craig, Tony and
Bates go out to bring Art in, or make him
comfortable for the night. But they found
the slope bare—a rock or snow avalanche
had taken him down. Art is gone, dead.”
At base camp, the men congregated to
discuss every last detail of their
recollections of what had happened high on
the mountain between August 7 and 10,
and they captured their discourse on a tape
recorder. On the CD called The
Brotherhood of the Rope, which Houston
produced in 2004, you hear the voices of
the men speaking in that discussion. Some
of the comments are deeply moving.
The seven survivors got back to Rawalpindi
on August 28, then went their separate
ways. But they stayed friends for the rest of
their lives. (There aren’t many expeditions
that can make that claim.) And in 1978, on
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the trip, all
seven held a joyful and poignant reunion in
the Wind River Range of Wyoming.
In 1993, forty years after the expedition,
members of a British team found Art
Gilkey’s bones on the Godwin Austen
Glacier, not far from base camp. During the
decades, his corpse had migrated with the
ice four miles from the place where he had
come to rest after his titanic plunge.
At the Banff Mountain Film and Book
Festival that November, Charlie Houston
gave the first of what would become a
hugely popular series of “armchair talks.”
Dispensing with the usual slide show,
Houston simply sat in a comfortable, wellupholstered
chair and answered questions
from the moderator, Geoff Powter, who was
the editor of the Canadian Alpine Journal.
I wasn’t there for that talk, but a friend who
was later recounted what happened so
vividly, I almost felt like I was present.
Powter skillfully lobbed his questions so
that they covered Houston’s long and
glorious career as a mountaineer and as
the world’s leading expert in high-altitude
medicine, giving him a chance to tell his
war stories. By now, Houston was eighty
years old, a living legend, and the audience
hung on his every word.
In that audience was Barry Blanchard, one
of Canada’s best mountaineers. He had
been on K2 the previous summer and had
participated in the recovery of Gilkey’s
remains. Blanchard waited through the Q &
A period at the end of Houston’s talk, until
Powter said, “Okay, one more question.”
Then he stood up, introduced himself, and
told the story of finding Gilkey’s body. Barry
is normally a confident speaker, but his
voice quavered as he announced the
discovery, which was news to almost
everyone in the crowd. He ended by telling
Houston that the climbers on the glacier
just two and a half months earlier had
recovered Gilkey’s bones and brought them
back to the United States, for eventual
burial in a family plot.
Then Barry sat down. It was obvious that
he hoped Houston would greet the stunning
news of the discovery with an emotion
matching his own, and perhaps even
express heartfelt gratitude. As Barry had
spoken, Houston had stared into the
audience in the direction of his voice. By
then, Houston was almost blind, so it’s
doubtful that he could even see the face of
the guy who had made the announcement
about Gilkey.
For long moments, Houston didn’t say a
word. The audience held its collective
breath. Finally, in a cold, even voice,
Houston said, “Frankly, I wish you had left
him the way you found him.” Barry was
devastated.
One reason why K2: The Savage Mountain
is such a great book, one of the true
classics of mountaineering literature, is that
Houston and Bates (and Craig and Bell,
who contributed a chapter each) tell their
story in such a straightforward manner. The
very directness of the prose animates the
drama of the book. There’s no bluster, no
bragging, not a whiff of nationalistic
bravado in the telling of what, for each of its
participants, was the adventure of a
lifetime. At the core, all eight of those
climbers were modest men.
So even though the expedition ended in
failure and tragedy, the lessons it taught
several younger generations of American
climbers were inspiring ones. “The
brotherhood of the rope” that Houston
celebrates was no sentimental invention—it
was the lifelong bond that their terrible
ordeal on K2 forged among its seven
survivors. The book affected me hugely.
When I first started going on expeditions, I
realized that even more important than
getting to the summit was the chance to
have a great adventure with partners I
really liked and trusted. And I found that
again and again, with teammates such as
David Breashears, J.-C. Lafaille, Rob Hall,
and Veikka Gustafsson.
In 1979, Nick Clinch, who led the team that
made the first ascent of Gasherbrum I, in
1958 (the only 8,000er first climbed by
Americans), and who would later serve as
president of the AAC, eloquently summed
up the legacy Houston and his teammates
had left behind them:
In my opinion, the high point of American
mountaineering remains the 1953
American Expedition to K2. The courage,
devotion and team spirit of that expedition
have yet to be surpassed, and still
represent the standards of conduct toward
which all American mountaineers should
aspire.
6
THE PRICE OF
CONQUEST
You would think that after the ordeal of
1953, Charlie Houston would never have
wanted to go near K2 again. On the
contrary, the tragedy only deepened his
fixation on the mountain. His passion for K2
was the equal of Mallory’s for Everest.
Houston applied for and received a permit
to put together yet another expedition in
1955.
In the meantime, however, Pakistan
granted the Italians permission for the
summer of 1954. After three expeditions,
Americans may have come to feel that K2
was “their” mountain, but the Italians had a
proprietary stake themselves in the world’s
second-highest peak. On top of the
pioneering effort by the Duke of the
Abruzzi’s team in 1909, Italy had fielded a
massive exploratory expedition to the
region in 1929. Led by another nobleman,
the Duke of Spoleto, this campaign remains
somewhat mysterious. In K2: The Story of
the Savage Mountain, Jim Curran calls it a
“debacle,” and summarizes its history in a
few pithy sentences:
Originally planned for 1928 to mark the
tenth anniversary of the end of the First
World War, the expedition was also to
coincide with one to the North Pole. K2
and/or Broad Peak were to be the
objectives but internal strife caused the
grandiose project to be modified, and then
postponed for a year. In the end it became
lamely designated the “Italian Geographical
Expedition to the Karakoram,” with no
mountaineering objectives at all.
The leader of the 1954 expedition was
Professor Ardito Desio, a geologist
teaching at the University of Milan. (Desio
would always insist that “Professor” be
prefixed to his name.) Fifty-seven years old
that summer, he was a tireless explorer of
remote regions who had already led eleven
scientific expeditions to Asia and Africa. His
climbing resume was distinctly thin, but, as
he bragged in his thumbnail bio in the
official book about the 1954 expedition, he
was “the author of three hundred
publications on geology, geography and
paleontology.” Desio was also a veteran of
the 1929 Karakoram adventure, during
which he and a single companion had
hiked up the Godwin Austen Glacier to its
head, as they carefully studied the Abruzzi
Ridge.
When the French team led by Maurice
Herzog climbed Annapurna, in 1950—the
first 8,000er ever to be ascended—that
triumph had a gigantic impact on the
people of France. The climbers returned to
wild celebrations that diminished not at all
over the subsequent months. It is not an
exaggeration to say that Annapurna meant
to France what putting the first man on the
moon meant to America. And the reason
for that frenzy had everything to do with
France’s emergence from World War II as
a battered country that had been occupied
by the hated Nazis for four and a half
years. The victory on Annapurna gave a
whole nation an incalculable boost of selfesteem.
In its own way, Hillary and Tenzing’s ascent
of Everest in 1953 had a comparable
impact on the British public, especially
when (thanks to a brilliant system of
couriers and coded messages organized by
the Times reporter James Morris) the news
arrived back in England just in time to be
announced in the middle of the coronation
of Queen Elizabeth II. (One wag later called
it “the last great day of the British Empire.”)
The 1950s were an intensely nationalistic
decade, and the politics between countries
inevitably crept into the world of sports. I
wasn’t born until three years later, but
some of my elders had vivid recollections of
the 1956 Olympics, when the Russians and
the Hungarians tried to kill each other in
their water polo match.
Like France, but for different reasons, Italy
was a battered country after World War II.
Everyone old enough to have lived through
it would never forget the sting of losing the
war, climaxed by Mussolini’s body being
hung upside down on a meat hook from the
roof of a gas station in Milan. Professor
Desio was thus fully aware of the potential
value in national pride should Italians make
the first ascent of K2.
But Desio was a geologist first and
foremost, a mountaineer second. So once
he was put in charge of the 1954
expedition, he conceived it as a joint
scientific and climbing mission, with
completely separate goals to be carried out
simultaneously. Along with eleven
mountaineers, a cameraman, and a
medical officer, the K2 expedition would
assemble five scientists, whose disciplines
ranged from anthropology to petrography.
Making arcane discoveries about the rate
of flow of a certain glacier or the linguistics
of Balti hill tribes was obviously not going to
stir the blood of the Italian public the way
getting up K2 would, but Desio was
adamant about his scientific program. In
Ascent of K2, the professor acknowledged
that many observers were skeptical of his
two-pronged attack on the Karakoram:
Its programme caused some bewilderment
in mountaineering circles, where it was felt
that so much scientific activity might
seriously interfere with the work of the
climbing party. That I refused to be
deflected from my course was due to my
conviction that success could be achieved
above all by careful preparation and by an
appropriate distribution of the tasks of the
two teams in space and time.
That passage gives the flavor of Desio’s
writing throughout the book. It’s hard for me
to think of any “official” account of a
dramatic expedition that’s as boring as
Desio’s Ascent, or as chock-full of
pompous posing and self-congratulatory
slaps on the back.
An old tradition, with roots in the Victorian
age, argues that exploration for its own
sake is simply self-indulgence, and that
every adventure in the wilderness should
have a scientific purpose. The most
poignant example of that faith in science
that I know of comes from Robert Falcon
Scott’s last expedition. When his
teammates finally discovered Scott’s last
camp on his return from the south pole,
eight months after the leader and his four
brave comrades had starved and frozen to
death, they found more than thirty pounds
of rocks—geological specimens—still
loaded on Scott’s sledge.
By 1954, however, that tradition was almost
obsolete. Certainly Houston’s and
Wiessner’s expeditions to K2 had made no
pretense of carrying out any scientific work
(unless you count Cranmer and Sheldon’s
little “geologizing” jaunt to Urdukas, which
was likely nothing more than an excuse to
flee base camp).
Desio took his science so seriously that he
ends Ascent of K2 not with the climbers’
triumphant return to base camp and thence
to civilization but with two chapters called
“The Work of the Scientists” and “Summary
of the Expedition’s Scientific Researches.”
While the climbers were struggling up the
Abruzzi Ridge, the “professors” were
puttering about the glaciers, doing things
like taking magnetic observations and
collecting “fauna” found above 13,000 feet.
(In 1992, the only fauna we saw at base
camp were goraks—huge, black ravenlike
birds—and mice, and I sure didn’t feel like
collecting any of them.)
Of the latter effort, Desio observes, with his
habitual smugness, “I personally took part
in this work, the results of which will repay
study on the part of specialists.” And he
closes the book not with a line like Herzog’s
famous “There are other Annapurnas in the
lives of men” but as follows: “Only when the
fruits of our labours are enshrined in the
five volumes scheduled for eventual
publication shall we be able to say that the
expedition’s work is done.” I wonder how
many people have read those five
volumes—assuming they ever got
published.
The professor was not only a scientist; he
was a born generalissimo. On the
mountain, the climbers would obey his
orders to the letter, or else. Desio justified
the militaristic organization of his team in a
memo he sent to all the potential expedition
candidates beforehand. He quotes it in full
in Ascent of K2. It’s not a document that
many climbers I know of would have been
happy signing off on:
The need for rigid discipline will become
apparent to every man once he has
grasped the essential fact that everything
must be subordinated to the attainment of
the final goal, which is the conquest of K2.
This discipline will be created by the spirit
of genuine brotherhood and mutual
understanding and confidence which must
prevail among the members of the
expedition.
Man, that’s about as far from Houston’s
concept of “brotherhood” as you can get!
You can’t order “genuine brotherhood and
mutual understanding” to exist: it has to
evolve among men, like the climbers in
1953, as they get to know each other on
the mountain. In the end, the 1954
expedition would generate the polar
opposite of brotherhood among the
principal climbers.
That kind of military approach to the
8,000ers, however, was far more common
in the 1950s than it is today. John Hunt, the
leader of the 1953 Everest expedition, was
selected by the Himalayan Committee of
the Alpine Club for his military background.
On the mountain, however, he exercised
his skill not by ordering climbers around like
toy soldiers but by keeping firm control over
the team’s complex logistics. And Hunt
never led from the rear, as Desio would. He
carried loads all the way up to 27,350 feet
and even contemplated trying for the
summit himself. In general, an expedition
chief who leads from the front and by
example inspires his team.
In 1950, before they left Paris, the French
climbers bound for Annapurna were
required by the Club Alpin Francais to
swear to an oath of complete obedience to
their leader, Maurice Herzog. Such
freethinkers as Gaston Rebuffat and Louis
Lachenal were taken aback at this demand,
but they mumbled the oath anyway,
knowing they had to in order to get a crack
at Annapurna. On the mountain, however,
Herzog constantly sought the advice of his
teammates, and he led from the front all the
way from base camp to the summit.
There’s no doubt that Desio was keen to
climb K2. He just didn’t want to do any of
the climbing himself—and at age fiftyseven,
with so little alpine experience, he
probably made a wise decision. In the end,
despite spending ninety-one days on the
Baltoro and Godwin Austen glaciers, aside
from a single jaunt to Camp II, aided by
fixed ropes, Desio never set foot on the
Abruzzi Ridge.
But the generalissimo was nothing if not
thorough. Before he even learned the
outcome of Houston’s expedition, and
before he knew whether his own permit for
1954 was approved (no done deal, since a
number of other countries had also
applied), he planned his own
reconnaissance of K2 for the late summer
of 1953. In Rawalpindi, Desio overlapped
for a couple of days with the Americans,
fresh from their defeat. They generously
shared all the information about the route
that Desio could have wanted.
With a single Italian companion, Desio flew
to Skardu in September 1953 and
undertook a thirty-two-day mini-expedition
of his own, hiking with porters all the way in
to the base of the Abruzzi Ridge and back
out again and making several side trips
along the way. The companion was
Ricardo Cassin. Forty-five years old that
summer, Cassin was the greatest Italian
mountaineer ever to that date, and one of
the greatest in the world. In the 1930s, he
had led the teams that had made the first
ascents of two of the classic six north faces
of the Alps—the Piz Badile and the
fearsome Walker Spur on the Grandes
Jorasses, near Chamonix.
Yet in Ascent, Desio says nothing about
Cassin’s contribution to the
reconnaissance. And his identification of
his partner is laconic in the extreme: “To
accompany me on this preliminary
reconnaissance I had chosen Ricardo
Cassin, a climber, to whose travelling
expenses the Italian Alpine Club had
generously contributed.”
Upon the return of the two men to Italy, and
with the official granting of the permit to
Desio in October, it was universally
assumed that Cassin would be the climbing
leader of the 1954 expedition. The reasons
for Desio’s coolness in print toward his
recon partner would eventually
emerge—though only if you read between
the lines.
With eighteen members from Italy,
comprising both climbers and scientists,
Desio’s extravaganza would amount to one
of the most massive expeditions ever
launched in the Himalaya or the
Karakoram. A comparison with the
American effort the year before puts this in
perspective. The Americans hired 180
porters to get their gear to base camp; the
Italians would end up employing 600, and
the total baggage those native porters
hauled amounted to sixteen tons of food
and gear. The budget for Houston’s team in
1953 was exactly $30,958.32 (the 1938
expedition had cost only a little over
$9,000); although Desio never discloses
the final figure, the cost of the Italian
expedition was well in excess of 70 million
lire, or about $108,000 in 1954 currency.
That figure calculates out to $821,000 in
today’s dollars—an astronomical sum, any
way you look at it.
The most expensive expedition I ever went
on was Jim Whittaker’s International Peace
Climb of Everest in 1990, because we
Americans footed the bill not only for
ourselves but for the Russian and Chinese
climbers as well. Far more typical of my
expeditions, though, would be one like my
last attempt on Annapurna, in 2005. With
only three climbers on the team—Jimmy
Chin, Veikka Gustafsson, and myself—that
trip cost us only $18,000, even though we
indulged in the luxury of helicoptering in to
base camp.
Another sign of the times, and of just how
nationalistic an enterprise K2 was for the
Italians, emerges from the fact that a
substantial part of their budget was raised
by the Club Alpino Italiano (CAI), which
solicited contributions from its members.
That kind of appeal sure wouldn’t fly today!
If I’d hit up AAC members for contributions
so I could go to Annapurna in 2005, I doubt
that I would have found very many checks
filling my mailbox. On the other hand, in
1954 there was no such thing as a climber
being sponsored by equipment companies.
Nowadays, we’re on our own when it
comes to raising money for an
expedition—we’re no longer carrying the
banner of the good old U.S. of A.
By late autumn of 1953, Desio and his
cronies in the CAI had made a list of
twenty-three climbers to be invited to
audition for the expedition. Desio chose his
scientists by word of mouth, but the
climbers had to undergo a much more
rigorous screening. In the winter of
1952–53, Houston had whittled his roster of
applicants down from about twenty-five to
five, but his process, while relatively
stringent, had required only a brief
interview in Exeter, New Hampshire (and,
as mentioned in the previous chapter, Dee
Molenaar didn’t even have to fly east to get
chosen). Desio instead organized a pair of
winter mountain training runs in the Alps,
which doubled as tryouts. In Ascent he
solemnly ticks off the qualities sought in the
candidates: “good health and physical
fitness, strength of character and iron
determination, mental preparedness and a
readiness for the task at hand based on
recent mountaineering experience. All other
qualities were of secondary importance.”
The candidates first assembled in mid-
January on a glacial plateau near Cervinia
for a ten-day camp. The men, as Desio
reported, were put through their paces as
they found themselves “taking part in
various climbing exercises on rocks and
ice, practis[ing] setting up tents on the
western spur of the Little Matterhorn,
conveying packages along a speciallyconstructed
light rope-way, communicating
with one another by portable radio, etc.” At
the end of the ten days, some doctors
hiked up to the plateau to administer
“psycho-physical tests.” Afterward, a panel
of thirteen self-styled experts cut two of the
candidates from the list.
To me, the whole thing sounds both brutal
and ridiculous. It’s pretty tough to forge
brotherhood when you’re competing with
the guy on the other end of the rope for a
place on the team. You can’t build an
effective team based only on the skill levels
of the climbers, and mutual respect and
trust can’t be dictated from on high. Near
the beginning of my climbing career, from
1980 to 1982, I tried out with Rainier
Mountaineering, Inc. (RMI) in hopes of
landing a job as a Rainier guide, and I got
hired only on my third attempt. But RMI
handled the whole business in a pretty
humane way; the veterans explained that
they were seeking a combination of people
skills and mountaineering talent. Just
because you were a phenomenal climber
didn’t mean you would make a good guide.
You had to be a patient teacher and show
compassion for your clients. All of that
made sense to me.
By the 1990s, no American expedition to an
8,000er had ever run its candidates through
a training mill like the one Desio concocted.
On the other hand, to this day the
Russians—despite the collapse of the
Soviet Union—maintain an equally Spartan
tryout procedure. They’ll get a bunch of
climbers together in the Caucasus and tell
them to race one another up some
mountain. The fastest six or so make the
grade: “Okay, you guys get to go to
Kangchenjunga.” As for brotherhood, the
Russians are told, “You will get along.”
It sounds absurd, but you wouldn’t believe
how hard the Russians fight for those slots.
In the USSR, the top climbers got the title
of “Master of Sport,” as well as such
additional perks as a free apartment and a
car.
From February 16 to 26, 1954, the CAI ran
its second tryout camp on Monte Rosa,
after Mont Blanc the second-highest peak
in the Alps. The team was then whittled
down to the eleven men who supposedly
performed the best, but before they could
count on going to K2, each man had to
pass ear, nose, throat, and dental exams
as well as receive a “prescribed course of
vaccination.”
Only one of those eleven would go on to be
a truly world-class mountaineer. That man
was the youngest of the eleven, twentyfour-
year-old Walter Bonatti, who earned
his living as a hutkeeper near his
hometown of Monza. Despite his youth,
Bonatti already had a better record than
any of his teammates on cutting-edge
routes in the Alps. On K2, he would end up
as the pivotal figure in the dark controversy
that would forever tarnish the Italian
triumph—a controversy that would still burn
half a century later.
One shocking result emerged from the
tryout camps. Ricardo Cassin, the greatest
climber in Italy in 1954, was rejected. The
official explanation was that he had failed a
medical test, but climbers all over Italy
knew better. Fifty-two years after the
expedition, and five years after Desio’s
death at the astonishing age of 104, one of
the principal K2 climbers, Lino Lacedelli,
set the record straight:
Desio’s version was that Cassin was
unable to take part for health reasons.
Varicose veins were mentioned, amongst
other things. But that wasn’t the real
reason. If Cassin had come, all the
newspapers would have focused on him
rather than Desio. To me that was obvious.
Cassin never got over it. He’s still upset
today. For us climbers, having Cassin
along would have been really great.
In his own way, Cassin took his revenge for
being snubbed. In 1958, he played a crucial
role in the first ascent of Gasherbrum IV in
the Karakoram, as Walter Bonatti and Carlo
Mauri reached the summit, setting a new
standard of difficulty in the Karakoram and
the Himalaya. And in 1961, at the age of
fifty-two, he led the first Italian team to
climb in Alaska since the Duke of the
Abruzzi in 1897, as they tackled the unclimbed
south face of Mount McKinley.
Despite incurring serious frostbite, all six
members reached the summit. The
beautifully direct route, known today simply
as “the Cassin,” is the most storied line on
North America’s highest peak. In January
2009, Cassin himself turned one hundred
years old.
Rereading Ascent of K2 today, I was struck
by how completely unaware Desio was of
the semicomic consequences of the
gargantuan logistical effort required to keep
his marching army in motion. From Skardu
to Askole, for instance, the 500 porters so
far employed by the Italians consumed
1,100 pounds of flour per day. There wasn’t
anything like that reserve of grain in the
region, so other porters had to hurry ahead
to lay in depots of flour at Askole.
I’ve seen this happen on even smaller
expeditions. You end up needing porters to
carry the food for the other porters, who are
in turn carrying food and gear for the
Europeans. This makes for a huge
logistical headache, but it’s unavoidable on
long approach hikes. If, as is often said, an
army marches on its stomach, these
massive caravans are in constant danger of
grinding to a halt.
At Urdukas, appalled by the wintry
conditions of early May, the porters at first
refused to go on. This delay meant that the
team immediately needed another
thousand pounds of flour, so Desio sent
porters back to Askole to haul up the
reserves that had been stocked in previous
weeks. The caravan finally got going again,
but it was no surprise that the porters called
an all-out strike at Concordia. Unless the
team could get its sixteen tons of stuff up
the last ten miles to base camp, the
expedition was doomed. Desio sounds
dumbfounded by this “desertion” on the
part of the porters: “Thereupon they
dumped their loads and, uttering hostile
shouts and singing religious songs,
returned that same evening the way they
had come. I was perplexed and
disconcerted.”
It took the intervention of the liaison officer
(the same Pakistani who had served
admirably on Houston’s expedition) to sort
out the mess and, in effect, bribe enough
porters to carry the loads the rest of the
way to base camp. It was only because the
team had left Italy so early in the season
that, despite all the delays en route from
Skardu, they were well established at base
camp by May 29.
As the 1953 American team had done, the
Italians hired Hunzas from Gilgit to serve as
high-altitude porters. Those thirteen men
would play a far more essential role on the
Abruzzi Ridge than did the Hunzas in ‘53,
who never went above Camp III. Two of the
Hunzas would go as high as the Italian
Camp VIII, at 25,300 feet, and one of them,
Amir Mahdi, would perform a heroic deed
that would lead directly to the team’s
eventual success and to the bitter
controversy that spun out of it. Yet Desio’s
narrative credits the Hunzas’ work only in
the most cursory way.
One measure of how tedious Ascent of K2
is as an account of the expedition is that
the reader doesn’t get to Skardu until page
94, to base camp until page 122—more
than halfway through the 239-page book.
And rather than seem the slightest bit
embarrassed by his party’s logistical
overkill, Desio revels in it. That’s a very
1950s attitude: the more gear and food, the
more porters, the author implies, the more
serious the expedition. It would take
another couple of decades before a
lightweight approach to the world’s highest
mountains would start to seem purer and
bolder than a massive army-style assault.
Desio also revels in his role as
generalissimo. Before leaving Skardu, the
leader took a flight around K2 in a plane
flown by Pakistani pilots. There was
absolutely no need for that flight for
reconnaissance, since the climbers knew
they were going to tackle the Abruzzi
Ridge, about which they had learned
everyting they needed to know from the
Americans in Rawalpindi. But Desio
devotes eight humdrum pages of his book
to this joyride. It all falls vaguely under the
heading of “Science” with a capital “S.” As
Desio sums up this aerial diversion,
Unfortunately, the responsibility of guiding
the pilots, coupled with the extremely high
speed of the aircraft, prevented me from
collecting all the information I would have
liked regarding the orographical structure of
the region and above all the relative
positions of the various glacial basins. But
a patient and scientific examination of our
films and photographic surveys may well
lead to the discovery of many hitherto
unsuspected geographical features.
When I first read that paragraph, I had to
look up “orographical.” It means “having to
do with the branch of physical geography
dealing with mountains.” I rest my case.
As early as May 26, four climbers started
up the Abruzzi, hoping to discover the site
of the Americans’ Camp II. (The launch of
the climb that was the expedition’s central
focus does not appear until page 138 of the
book.) Before they could get started,
though, the mountaineers were required to
digest a route guide their leader had
prepared.
That guide, reprinted in full in Ascent,
represents a classic case of
micromanaging from the rear. The leader at
base camp, with his binoculars or
telescope, thinks he can direct the climbers
on the route better than they can
themselves. A sample:
Camp VI to Camp VII. A rise of 1,640 feet.
After negotiating a series of steep, difficult
rocks, necessitating the use of several
pitons, the climber is confronted with a
dangerous eastward traverse of some 590
feet over ice which slopes at an angle of
45°.
Whether or not Desio got the idea from
Pete Schoening’s A-frame tripod, which the
Americans had used to haul loads up
House’s Chimney, the Italians brought
along a thousand-foot-long steel cable and
constructed a pair of windlasses, crankoperated
hauling devices. This apparatus
would serve to lug vast quantities of gear
over stretches as long as a thousand feet,
all the way up to Camp V, at 22,000 feet.
On June 2, Desio found a small saddle on
the Godwin Austen Glacier; from there he
supervised the first attempt to use a
windlass to get loads to Camp II. “All went
well,” he reported.
Slowly the climbers and the Hunzas got
camps established and huge piles of gear
ferried and winched up the route. And as
the distance between them and base camp
grew, the climbers allowed themselves
various small acts of resistance to the iron
mandates of their dictator down below.
This was not easy. Every day, Desio typed
out—on an actual typewriter hauled all the
way to base camp—the orders for the day,
then had them carried by the Hunzas or
radioed up to the climbers. In 2003, when
he was interviewed by an American
journalist, Lino Lacedelli recalled one such
command: “Order 13: ‘Who will not obey
my orders will be punished with the
heaviest weapon in the world—the press.’
“We called him ‘Il Capetto’ [the Little
Chief],” Lacedelli reminisced. (Desio was
shorter than all the climbers, some of whom
stood no more than five foot five.)
In one critical respect, the 1954 Italian plan
for K2 differed from those of all previous
expeditions to the mountain: up high, the
climbers intended to use bottled oxygen.
Those bottles themselves would become a
major cause of the enduring controversy.
Desio was such a control freak that long
before the climbers got high on the
mountain, he had decided on the precise
movements to be carried out on the summit
assault. The memorandum of instructions
for that assault is also reprinted verbatim in
Ascent of K2. A sample:
Second day. B, C, and possibly also A, the
group-leader, will move up to Camp IX
together with F and G. A, B and C will each
carry an oxygen-mask complete with
cylinders and sufficient food for two days. F
and G will carry oxygen-masks in addition
to a Super K2 tent and two small cylinders
filled with propane. B, C and possibly A will
spend the night at Camp IX, while F and G
will return to Camp VIII.
You cannot, of course, dictate these kinds
of troop movements on an 8,000er.
Everything depends on the weather, the
snow conditions, and the relative strengths
of different climbers, so up high you always
have to be flexible and ready to improvise
to meet the challenges thrown at you.
Desio just didn’t seem to get this
fundamental truth about mountaineering.
The oldest among the eleven climbers, at
age forty, was Achille Compagnoni. A guide
and ski instructor, he had a decent record
as an alpinist but was not the equal of
several of his teammates, including
Lacedelli and Bonatti. Nevertheless, early
on Desio appointed Compagnoni as his
climbing leader. This choice didn’t sit well
with some of those teammates. Lacedelli
wrote in 2006, in K2: The Price of
Conquest:
More than anything Desio preferred those
who agreed with him. Most of us were not
happy with this. We were not the sort of
characters to flatter the expedition leader.
We did what we had to and that was all….
[Compagnoni] flattered Desio and vice
versa. This annoyed us a lot, particularly
later on when Desio made him leader of the
first climbing group [for the summit assault].
None of us felt he deserved this.
The mutual ass-kissing between
Compagnoni and Desio leaves its traces in
the pages of Ascent. Desio lavishes almost
no praise on the other climbers in the team,
but Compagnoni is “a man endowed with
great strength of both body and mind,” of
whom on more than one occasion the
leader stands in admiration: “I had a long
conversation that day with Compagnoni,
and at the end of it I was left with the
unshakable conviction that he was a man
of iron will who would let nothing deflect
him from his main purpose.”
Then, on June 21, with the team no higher
than Camp IV at 21,500 feet, a sad event
took place that could well have wrecked the
expedition. Three days before, Mario
Puchoz, a thirty-six-year-old guide from
Courmayeur, had carried a load to Camp
IV, but on returning to II complained of a
throat infection. As his condition worsened,
the expedition doctor put him on antibiotics
and bottled oxygen. At 1:00 A.M. on June
21, in Desio’s telling, “the sick man—who
had appeared to be sleeping—suddenly
passed away after a very brief agony.”
The doctor had diagnosed Puchoz’s
condition as pneumonia, but I wonder if it
wasn’t yet another case of pulmonary
edema. In a difficult maneuver, several
climbers managed to lower Puchoz’s body
all the way to the foot of the Abruzzi Ridge.
He was then buried by his teammates “in a
grave carved out of rock” near the cairn
erected the year before in honor of Art
Gilkey. Ever since, that cenotaph has been
known as the Gilkey-Puchoz memorial.
There seems to have been no thought
among the team members of canceling the
expedition. But, as Lacedelli later wrote,
When we returned to the camp after
burying Puchoz, Desio immediately said,
“Tomorrow you need to go back up!” That
started a big argument because we wanted
to be left alone for at least a day, after all
we had lost one of our colleagues. But
Desio was immovable. He wanted us to
leave the next day. We went away very
upset.
When a climber dies in the early stages of
an expedition, the whole team has to
decide whether to call it off and go home or
to continue with the effort. In the latter
case, the teammates always justify the
decision with a phrase like the one
Lacedelli used: “We must get to the summit
for Mario.”
Desio’s rationale for forging onward was
more grandiose: “It was our duty, then, to
continue the ascent with renewed energy,
that we might the sooner be able to inscribe
on Puchoz’s grave-stone the date of the
feat with which his name would be forever
associated.”
I’m really fortunate in that I’ve never had to
face that kind of decision. In fact, I’ve never
lost a partner on a climb. In that situation, I
don’t know what I’d do. It’s a complicated
dilemma. If there’s a single determining
factor in making that choice, it seems to be
the size of the expedition. The larger it is,
the more likely the members are to decide
to go on with their campaign and climb the
mountain in honor of their fallen comrade.
In 1963, the American Everest expedition
lost Jake Breitenbach, one of their
youngest and most skilled members, early
on, when a serac collapsed in the Khumbu
Icefall, crushing him beneath tons of ice.
One of the two teammates who was roped
to Breitenbach and witnessed the collapse
described the debris as “the size of two box
cars, one atop the other.” It was obvious at
once that there was no hope of even
searching for the man’s body. Breitenbach
had had one close buddy on the team,
Barry Corbet, but he’d scarcely known most
of the other climbers. That impersonality
within a large expedition seems to allow the
members to go through a mourning ritual,
but then gird up their loins and head back
into battle.
On the other hand, on Chris Bonington’s
eight-man attempt on K2’s west ridge in
1978, Nick Estcourt was killed in an
avalanche after the men had spent only
twelve days on the mountain. Those guys
were among the toughest and most
ambitious mountaineers of their day, but
they were all good friends of Estcourt’s and
had shared previous expeditions with him.
After a futile search for his body, the
survivors sat down to discuss what to do.
They were divided right down the middle,
but since only three climbers (including
Bonington) wanted to go on, they all gave
in to the wishes of the other four and called
the expedition off.
Yet in 1952, on the French expedition to
Fitz Roy in Patagonia, with a team as small
and close-knit as Bonington’s, Jacques
Poincenot was drowned on the approach
march in a botched attempt to ford a
dangerous river. Lionel Terray, one of the
greatest expedition mountaineers in history,
later wrote in his autobiography,
Conquistadors of the Useless,
[Jacques] was a perfect companion and a
prodigious climber, and his sudden
disappearance dealt us a cruel blow. For
forty-eight hours, indeed, we debated
seriously whether to pack up and go home.
After a few days we recovered our spirits
and carried on, seriously weakened,
however, by the loss of one of our best
members.
More than a month later, Terray and Guido
Magnone made the first ascent of that
beautiful pyramid of granite and ice. The
team named a handsome nearby peak
Aiguille Poincenot, in homage to their lost
comrade.
As the Italians worked their way up the
Abruzzi Ridge, they found a vast range of
enthusiasm and usefulness among their
Hunza high-altitude porters. Only five of the
thirteen seemed fully up to the challenge of
carrying loads above Camp III. Of the
others, Lacedelli recalled, “With them you
agreed one thing and then you didn’t see
them again. You would go back down and
discover that they were still in the tent
sleeping. It would drive you mad.”
Desio, too, complained about these
slackers: “The language difficulty, the
indiscipline of the Hunzas and the
capriciousness of certain among them …
frequently led to misunderstandings which
it was not always easy to clear up.”
Disciplinarian to the end, Desio eventually
ordered “the dismissal of three men and the
return of the five delinquents to their posts
on the Abruzzi Ridge.”
Fifty-five years later, it’s hard to guess what
was going on with the Hunzas. The
language barrier must indeed have played
its nefarious part. Since the Karakoram
region had for so long been part of British
India, some of the Hunzas spoke a
smattering of English. But they certainly
didn’t speak any Italian. Desio could
probably get by in English, but mountain
guides such as Compagnoni, Lacedelli, and
Bonatti, who had never traveled far from
northern Italy, didn’t comprehend a word of
that language.
It may be fortunate that the less
courageous Hunzas were scared out of
their minds on the Abruzzi Ridge.
Houston’s team had wisely decided that the
Hunzas’ meager climbing skills made them
a liability above Camp III. Desio, however,
expected them to carry loads all the way up
to the Shoulder at 26,000 feet. Hunza terror
on steep terrain may well have looked to
the Italians like mere laziness. It’s also
possible that these high-altitude porters
bridled every bit as much as Lacedelli and
his disaffected teammates did under
Desio’s stern dictatorship.
One incident barely mentioned in Desio’s
text reveals the true courage some of the
Hunzas were capable of. On July 6, one of
the climbers, Cirillo Floreanini, started to
descend from Camp III. For security, he
held on to a fixed rope left from the
American expedition the year before, but
he had no sooner put his weight on the
rope than the anchor popped loose. Before
the horrified eyes of his teammates,
Floreanini rolled and then bounced 800 feet
before stopping on a narrow ledge.
Lacedelli ran to his aid. Writes Desio,
“Bruised and bleeding, he was then hoisted
on to the shoulders of a Hunza, who,
helped by his colleagues, carried him down
to Camp II.”
I’ve participated in a number of rescues on
the 8,000ers, but I sure as hell have never
carried another climber on my shoulders
down steep terrain! That’s an almost
unimaginable feat. But Desio doesn’t even
bother to mention the gutsy Hunza by
name. Just one more job the men from
Gilgit were expected to perform.
As they crept higher on the Abruzzi, the
climbers’ frustration with Desio’s autocratic
leadership mounted. Typically,
Compagnoni would radio down to base
camp after each day’s effort. He and Desio
would discuss the day’s events; then the
leader would dictate the next day’s orders
over the radio. Compagnoni relayed the
command to his teammates.
A minor mutiny eventually erupted. As
Lacedelli remembers it,
For a while we played along, but then we
told Compagnoni it wouldn’t work. We said
that the orders had to be based on the
needs of those on the highest rope party….
“They know best what they need,” we said,
“not Desio, not even you.” “I’m sorry,”
Compagnoni would say, “but Desio has
spoken.” “We couldn’t care less,” I said
eventually.
No one worked harder on the mountain
than Walter Bonatti. And no one cared
more about getting to the summit than he.
But as the youngest member of the team,
he knew it was unlikely that Compagnoni or
Desio would choose him for a summit
attempt. Throughout the expedition,
moreover, relations between Bonatti and
Compagnoni were cool at best.
Despite the tensions between the climbers
high on the Abruzzi and their leader typing
out orders from base camp, a chain of wellstocked
camps crept up the mountain.
Logistical overkill can work on a mountain,
in the simple sense of getting men and
gear and food in place. The Italians were
skilled climbers, technically perhaps a bit
better than the Americans of the previous
year. (Most of the Italians worked at least
parttime as professional guides in the Alps,
which gave them a steady climbing
regimen. The Americans all had jobs or
graduate school programs, from which they
could escape only on weekends and
holidays to hone their mountain craft.) And
two of the Hunzas, Mahdi and Isakhan,
performed as well at altitude as the Italians.
On July 18, four men, including Bonatti, first
reached the Shoulder, where they chose a
site for Camp VIII. It was not until ten days
later, however, that that camp was
installed. At 25,300 feet, it stood only 200
feet lower than the Americans’ Camp VIII of
the year before, where Art Gilkey had
collapsed with thrombophlebitis.
So in a few days the stage was set for what
ought to have been one of the proudest
accomplishments in twentieth-century
exploration. Instead, what developed high
on K2 during the following days would turn
into a feud so sordid, bitter, and longlasting
that it has few parallels in
mountaineering history.
On July 28, Desio made radio contact with
the climbers at Camp VII. But then, during
the critical days that followed, the leader at
base camp lost touch completely with the
high camps. The Little Chief was vexed.
As time went on we became more and
more anxious. We were sorely tempted to
set out in a body for the ridge, but on
second thoughts we decided that it would
be wiser to remain in camp with our ears
glued to the radio-set, ready to intervene as
and when circumstances required. We had
set up the radio out in the open, on a
“glacier table” [a flat rock perched on a
pedestal of ice], and we tried to contact our
colleagues at half-hourly intervals.
To no avail. Just what sort of intervention
Desio planned if he did make contact, only
he would have known.
Fifty-two years later, Lacedelli would shed
light on the radio silence:
At Camp VIII, we couldn’t make contact
with Base Camp by radio, so we weren’t
able to tell them that we had reached 7,750
meters and established Camp VIII. That
day, Desio was at “Sella dei Venti” [Windy
Gap] on the left side of the mountain,
looking down. Then, suddenly, we heard
Desio on the radio. “I haven’t got time for
you,” he said, “I need to get on with my
studies.” … He just got really annoyed. So I
told him where he could go, and said,
“From now on, if you want to know what’s
going on you can come up and find out for
yourself!” End of radio contact.
Compagnoni, however, would insist that no
radio communications were possible from
Camp VIII and higher because the climbers
no longer had line of sight to base camp.
According to Desio’s orders, the first
summit team was supposed to be
Compagnoni and Ubaldo Rey,
Compagnoni’s regular tentmate, a thirtyone-
year-old guide from Courmayeur. They
were supposed to set out from Camp VIII,
establish a camp high on the Shoulder,
then go for the summit the next day. They
would be supported by their other
teammates, who would ferry loads up to
Camp IX.
But after he started out on July 28, Rey
gained only about 160 feet before dumping
his load and turning back. According to
Lacedelli, “Two of us actually had to help
him back to the tent because he could
hardly stand up.” Stricken by some kind of
altitude sickness, Rey gave up all hopes of
the summit and headed down the
mountain.
Thus, almost by accident, Lacedelli took
Rey’s place in the summit party. Lacedelli
had never gotten along with Desio, who
had relegated him to the “B team”—the
“second group,” which also included Bonatti
and whose duty was mainly to carry loads
in support of the five climbers in the “first
group.” A twenty-nine-year-old guide from
Cortina d’Ampezzo in the Dolomites,
Lacedelli was treated almost with contempt
by Desio, as if he were a country bumpkin
lucky to be invited on the expedition.
On July 26, at Camp VII, Bonatti had
suffered from food poisoning—he thought
he might have eaten spoiled sardines—and
was so ill that he had had to stay in camp
while his teammates pushed on to Camp
VIII. Furious with himself and deeply
depressed, Bonatti decided to force his way
back into the action. He would recall in
1961, “I decided to eat at all costs, though
the very thought made me feel sick; only in
this way, I thought, would I be able to
regain a little of my lost strength and
resume my place up there.” By July 29, he
was almost back to his normal self. And, as
it would turn out, Bonatti was fitter and
stronger than anyone else on the mountain.
On July 30, Compagnoni and Lacedelli
pushed up to the Shoulder, traversed it,
and set up a Camp IX at 26,250 feet. Their
choice of a campsite was a curious one:
instead of pitching their tent on the broad,
almost level ridge of the Shoulder, they
angled left and stopped at a narrow shelf
hidden among the rocks at the base of the
summit pyramid, very near where Fritz
Wiessner had started climbing the final
band on his first attempt, in 1939.
It was only after more than fifty years of
silence that Lacedelli cast new light on the
decision about where to pitch Camp IX. In
2006, he wrote,
Compagnoni and I reached the place we
had all agreed on for Camp IX. I said to
Compagnoni, “Shall we pitch the tent?” but
Compagnoni said, “No, here is no good, it’s
too dangerous.” He then suggested we
cross over to the left. I said, “Isn’t it more
dangerous that way?” But he wouldn’t listen
and so we carried On…. Eventually we
reached a place that wasn’t particularly
good … it was precarious with a bit of a
slope.
A camp at the base of the rock band would
have made sense only if the two men
planned to attack the cliffs above, as
Wiessner had. But Lacedelli and
Compagnoni intended to climb the
Bottleneck couloir the next morning. On
Wiessner’s second attempt, he had had to
lead the dangerous traverse across the
lower edge of the rock band just to get to
the foot of the Bottleneck.
The true reason for Compagnoni’s
insistence on the out-of-the-way location for
Camp IX would not become clear until
more than half a century after the
expedition.
After pitching their tent on the “precarious”
slope among the rocks, Lacedelli and
Compagnoni were poised to make the
summit attempt on July 31. But they were
convinced they had no chance to get to the
top without supplemental oxygen. Unable
to carry heavy oxygen bottles to Camp IX
along with their tent, stove, sleeping bags,
and food, they counted on their teammates
at Camp VIII to ferry up the critical
cylinders.
Only there were two problems. The oxygen
bottles that Lacedelli and Compagnoni
needed were not at Camp VIII but down at
Camp VII, at only 24,700 feet. And one by
one, the other Italians up high who ought to
have been able to ferry loads had
succumbed to lethargy or altitude sickness.
By July 30, only two men were capable of
supporting the summit duo. They were
Walter Bonatti and the Hunza Amir Mahdi.
In a heroic effort, on July 30 Bonatti
recruited Mahdi to perform the ultimate load
carry. That day the two men descended to
Camp VII, picked up two racked sets of
oxygen bottles (loads weighing almost forty
pounds per man), carried them back up to
Camp VIII, and then, with only a short rest,
pushed up onto the Shoulder toward Camp
IX.
It was dusk before an exhausted Bonatti
and Mahdi reached the point on the
Shoulder, at 26,000 feet, where the team
had agreed to pitch Camp IX. But there
was no tent in sight. Deeply alarmed,
Bonatti cried out, “Lino! Achille! Where are
you?” He scanned the frozen slope above
him, as darkness began to engulf the
mountain. The only answer was silence.
Bonatti guessed that his teammates must
be less than 600 feet away, somewhere in
the scattered rocks. The traverse to reach
those rocks, however, would be perilous in
the extreme, and it was now almost
pitchdark. Bonatti’s headlamp had ceased
to work, and Mahdi had no lamp of his own.
Abruptly, a light pierced the gloom, to the
left and slightly above the climbers. At
Camp IX, one of the summit duo must at
last have heard Bonatti’s cries and turned
on his own headlamp to show the way. But
now Bonatti heard Lacedelli call out, “Have
you got the oxygen?”
“Yes!”
“Good! Leave it there and go straight
down!”
What could Lacedelli mean? Was he simply
unwilling to share his small tent with the
two teammates who had worked so hard to
support the summit bid? “I can’t!” Bonatti
protested. “Mahdi can’t make it!”
The beam of light promised safety only a
few hundred feet away. Crazed by
exhaustion, Mahdi started scrabbling, out of
control, across the dangerous slope toward
Camp IX. Bonatti shouted at his partner to
stop, but the language barrier now worked
its sinister confusion. (Mahdi spoke only
Urdu, Bonatti only Italian, with a mere
handful of English words their common
vocabulary.) “Mahdi! Turn back! No good!”
yelled Bonatti, to no avail.
Abruptly the beam of light switched off.
Once again, only silence came from above.
A panicked Mahdi yelled in English, “No
good, Compagnoni Sahib! No good,
Lacedelli Sahib!”
At last Bonatti managed to coax the Hunza
back to the precarious stance he had
kicked in the slope. For another half hour,
Bonatti screamed his own curses into the
night. “No, I don’t want to die!” he wailed.
“Lino! Achille! Help us, damn you!” Not a
word came from Camp IX.
Finally, in a fog of rage and despair, Bonatti
turned to the slope before him and began
to hack out a ledge with his ice ax. The two
men had neither tent nor sleeping bag.
Never before had anyone attempted, let
alone survived, a bivouac in the open at
such an altitude.
“I could have gone down in the dark by
myself, even without a headlamp,” Bonatti
recalled in 2003. “But Mahdi was out of his
mind. Several times I had to keep him from
running away. Mahdi was like an unchained
force of nature. Even in the night, he was
yelling crazily. I had to find a way to calm
him down just with the tone of my voice. I
tried to invent my own English—convincing
sounds, more than words. ‘Good, Mahdi,
good,’ I said over and over. ‘No! No!’ he
answered. That was his only word.
“It took a long time to dig a ledge out of the
icy slope. We sat very close together.
Mahdi was too tired to take his crampons
off, so I did it for him. Otherwise his
frostbite would have been even worse.
“I spent the whole night looking at my five
fingers to see if they were still there.
Making up problems in my head to see if I
still think right. I kept banging my legs with
my ice ax—that was before we knew it was
a bad thing to do. It was as if one breath
lasted the whole night.”
In the wee hours, a sudden snow squall
descended on the mountain. Bonatti and
Mahdi were smothered in blowing snow.
Three times Bonatti had to dig himself and
Mahdi out.
As soon as first light arrived, Mahdi took
off, almost running down the mountain
toward Camp VIII. “In the morning,” Bonatti
remembered, “I was a piece of ice. I didn’t
have the strength to restrain him. All I could
do was put on his crampons. My heart was
beating fast as I watched him go. Then he
reached a flat area, and I knew he was
okay.” Bonatti cached the oxygen gear in
the snow, then gathered himself and slowly
climbed down to Camp VIII.
It’s a tribute to Bonatti’s coolheadedness
that both men survived that night. Other
climbers, including Hornbein and Unsoeld
on Everest, would later get through even
higher bivouacs in one piece (though
Unsoeld lost his toes to frostbite), but in
1954, most climbers would have said that
to attempt to survive a night without shelter
at 26,000 feet was to invite certain death.
And just as I admire Wiessner for not
abandoning Pasang Lama in 1939, I
admire Bonatti, who could have saved his
own skin by going down to Camp VIII in the
dark, for not abandoning Mahdi.
At first light on July 31, Compagnoni and
Lacedelli prepared for their summit push. In
Desio’s Ascent of K2, the short chapter
covering the events of July 30 and 31 bears
the footnote “As described by Achille
Compagnoni and Lino Lacedelli.” The
narrative veers awkwardly between the first
and the third person. Sometimes it is “we”
who act, sometimes “Compagnoni” or
“Lacedelli.” But even though Desio must
have edited the chapter, it remains the
principal source for Compagnoni and
Lacedelli’s side of this unhappy story—or
would remain so until 2006. In a small book
he published that year, called K2: The Price
of Conquest, Lacedelli insisted that he had
nothing to do with the contents of the
chapter in Ascent and that it was based
entirely on Compagnoni’s diary.
In that chapter, on July 30 the two men
installed at Camp IX see a pair of tiny
figures approaching from below, far too late
in the afternoon. In the first person, the
narrative says, “As dusk was falling we
heard shouts. At once we came out of the
tent. In the semi-darkness we could not see
Bonatti and Mahdi, but we recognized their
voices. Unfortunately, the high wind made
conversation extremely difficult.” At last
Lacedelli thought he understood Bonatti to
be yelling that although he “could manage
by himself,” Mahdi wanted to return at once
to Camp VIII.
“Go back!” we shouted. “Go back! Leave
the masks! Don’t come any farther!” It did
not occur to us that our colleague could be
thinking of spending the night at such an
altitude without a tent or even a sleepingbag.
Now Bonatti’s voice was no longer audible.
“Obviously,” we thought, “he’s taken our
advice and gone down below.”
The two men in the cramped tent spent a
miserable, sleepless night. At first light they
emerged to see “an ominous carpet of mist”
creeping up from below.
We searched the snow-covered slope
below for the oxygen-masks which Bonatti
and Mahdi were supposed to have left
there the evening before. Suddenly, to our
amazement, we caught sight of a figure
receding into the distance. Who was
it—Bonatti or Mahdi? … We called out to
the man at the top of our voices. He
stopped and turned around, but he did not
answer, and after a moment he resumed
his halting progress down the precipitous
slope.
We were simply flabbergasted…. How
could we suspect the truth—namely that
two men had survived the rigours of a
whole night spent in the open at an altitude
of more than 26,000 feet?
Is this account completely fictitious? It’s
true that high wind can make shouted
conversations extremely difficult to
understand. In 2005, when Veikka
Gustafsson and I were camped at 22,000
feet on Annapurna, waiting for the wind to
die down so we could go for the summit,
our three Italian friends were in a tent only
fifty feet away. Especially with the language
barrier, shouting to each other over the
wind made communication difficult at best.
Eventually we resorted to hand signals, like
thumbs-up or thumbs-down.
I suppose it’s possible that Lacedelli and
Compagnoni sincerely believed that the two
men who had brought up the oxygen had
descended in the dark, and only realized in
the morning that they must have
bivouacked. (Bonatti swears that no one
called out to him in the morning.) But the
obvious reason for Lacedelli and
Compagnoni to have yelled out, “Go back!”
was that they would have been extremely
reluctant to share their cramped two-man
tent with the refugees from the arduous
load carry.
In Compagnoni’s account, the two men left
their tent at 5:00 A.M. They traversed
across the slope, then headed straight
down to the site of the cache Bonatti and
Mahdi had left. He reported, “Having
reached our objective, we hoisted the
crates each containing three cylinders onto
our backs.” This is a key passage, for in it
Compagnoni acknowledges that heavy
oxygen bottles were the cargo Bonatti and
Mahdi had hauled up to 26,000 feet. Yet in
the dialogue quoted above, the men
demand “Leave the masks!” Why masks,
not bottles? A possible reason for this
strange locution would not emerge until
many years after the expedition.
By now, the mist had risen and the first
snowflakes had started to fall. It sounds like
a situation similar to ours on summit day in
1992. And the two men now uttered words
very much like the ones Scott, Charley, and
I exchanged. Their dialogue is captured in
the summit chapter of Desio’s Ascent of K2
. “What do you say?” Lacedelli asked.
Compagnoni answered, “I say we ought to
have a try.” (It’s of course quite convenient
that Compagnoni gives himself the credit
for being the more committed climber.)
At the foot of the Bottleneck, the two men
decided the couloir was too dangerous.
Fifteen years earlier, insisted Compagnoni,
Wiessner had found the ice “clear and
firm,” but now “it was covered with such a
mass of snow that it would have been
madness to climb it.” Madness, one
presumes, because it looked ready to
avalanche, not because of the hanging ice
cliff far above.
So the two men attacked the very edge of
the rock band, several hundred feet left of
the Bottleneck. Compagnoni took a short
leader fall but was unhurt; Lacedelli led a
hundred-foot cliff after taking off both his
crampons and his gloves. “Here, in fact,”
Compagnoni writes, “we found that our
resources were already taxed to the limit.”
Hours passed by. The men slowly solved
the edge of the rock band, then the ramp
leading left to the summit snowfield. In one
place, the snow was so deep, it took
Compagnoni an hour to gain 50 vertical
feet. Then: “Suddenly, at intervals of a few
seconds, we both experienced a horrible
sensation. We found ourselves gasping for
breath.” The two men had used up their
bottled oxygen.
This event would prove to be a critical pivot
point in the controversy that would, for half
a century, hang over the first ascent.
Strangely enough, rather than dump the
useless bottles, the men kept the “crates”
on their backs. Realizing that this would
make little sense to other climbers,
Compagnoni offers a four-point
explanation. The key claims are two: that
the pair wanted to leave something on the
summit to prove their ascent, and that “in
order to discard the crates we should have
had to throw ourselves flat on the snow,
which was very deep and unstable.”
This sounds just plain weird. During the few
expeditions on which I’ve used
supplemental oxygen—when I was guiding
clients on Everest, for instance—I’ve
always found that I can barely tolerate the
weight even with the oxygen flowing. If I ran
out of oxygen, I’d just chuck the thing,
because you simply don’t have the strength
to carry useless bottles. In 1991 on
Everest, when a faulty valve screwed up
my oxygen rig, I simply shrugged off my
pack and left the thing sitting in the snow.
It’s hard to imagine that Lacedelli and
Compagnoni couldn’t ditch those heavy
bottles with a similar shrug of the
shoulders.
The men plugged on. All the way up,
Compagnoni insists, the men took not a
single sip of water. He adds, “We had
feared that the lack of oxygen would result
in a loss of energy, but this was not so.”
That claim, too, doesn’t quite ring true.
When you’re breathing gas for hours and
suddenly run out, you crash with a
vengeance. Jon Krakauer describes that
happening to him on Everest in 1996, as he
reached the Hillary Step on his way down
from the summit: “My cognitive functions,
which had been marginal before, instantly
went into a nosedive. I felt like I’d been
slipped an overdose of a powerful
sedative.”
At 6:00 P.M., Compagnoni and Lacedelli
reached the summit. They embraced each
other, tied flags to their ice axes for the
summit photos, took a self-timed photo of
themselves together—and finally threw off
the dead weight of the oxygen crates.
The descent was a nightmare, as each
man fell and slid several times, but fetched
up in soft snow. Instead of downclimbing
the edge of the rock band, they plungestepped
straight down the Bottleneck,
which did not avalanche. At one point in the
night, the men thought they were lost. Their
fingers were frostbitten (both would later
undergo amputations). Finally they saw a
light in the distance—a headlamp or a
stove inside one of the tents at Camp VIII.
The ordeal was over. According to their
account in Desio’s book: “Arms were flung
around our waists, questions were fired at
us, hands were clapped on our shoulders.
Abram, Bonatti and Gallotti literally jumped
for joy, and the two Hunzas, Mahdi and
Isakhan, seemed hardly less delighted.”
K2 had been climbed.
Bonatti corroborates that joyous reunion.
He wrote in 1961, in Le Mie Montagne, “At
11 P.M., five hearts were exulting over the
same victory in the same tent…. At that
moment, and only for that moment, I forced
myself to forget all other reality.”
Only for that moment…. Bonatti recalled in
2003, “I kept waiting for Lacedelli or
Compagnoni to apologize. At Camp VIII,
there was no ‘Bravo, Walter.’ Not a word of
thanks, never. In base camp, I waited to
hear excuses. I was conscious of what I
had suffered, but I was young and
ingenuous. The true of story of K2—the
really bad story—begins after the
expedition.”
Amazingly, Bonatti had escaped from the
bivouac unscathed. It was Mahdi who
turned out to be the true martyr of K2,
eventually suffering the amputation of
nearly all his toes and fingers. The finest
Hunza climber of his day, Mahdi had, just
the year before, helped carry the badly
frostbitten Hermann Buhl down Nanga
Parbat. After K2, reduced to a virtual
cripple, Mahdi would never again go into
the high mountains.
In Ascent of K2, Desio makes no
acknowledgment of Mahdi’s sacrifice. The
closest he comes to mentioning the man’s
terrible frostbite is in a single comment
about the effort of the team to get down the
mountain: “The Hunzas, however,
postponed their departure from Camp V
until they had administered first aid to
Mahdi. As a result, the return of the
climbing party was delayed for a whole
day.”
Back in Italy, the triumph on K2 made a
titanic splash. Compagnoni and Lacedelli
were instantly enshrined in the pantheon of
their country’s demigods of adventure. For
decades, they remained Italy’s most
famous mountaineers. And in 2004, as the
country engaged in a year-long celebration
of the fiftieth anniversary of its greatest
mountaineering achievement, Compagnoni
and Lacedelli, then ninety and seventy-nine
years old, were feted again as national
heroes.
Bonatti, however, was lastingly embittered
by the expedition. In 1961, he published Le
Mie Montagne, a memoir of his finest
climbs. There he revealed how Desio’s
expedition had changed his very character:
“Until the conquest of K2 I had always felt a
great affinity for and trust of other men, but
after what happened in 1954 I came to
mistrust people. I tended to rely only on
myself.”
The publication of Bonatti’s version of what
happened on July 30 and 31 caused quite
a stir in Italy. Rather than the innocent
miscommunication at dusk that
Compagnoni’s account had described,
Bonatti made it clear that he thought his
two teammates had hung him and Mahdi
out to dry. “They didn’t want to know if we
were in the bivouac,” he bitterly mused in
2003. “I was supposed to die. That would
make the expedition even more glorious.”
By the time I read On the Heights, the
English translation of Le Mie Montagne, I
was twenty-two years old. Bonatti was
already a hero of mine, because his epic
adventures—the terrible retreat from the
Freney Pillar on Mont Blanc, the amazing
solo on the Petit Dru, and, of course,
K2—were legendary. But after reading his
own gripping accounts of these climbs, I
saw him as even more of a supernatural
character. He was obviously one of the
most phenomenally gifted climbers of all
time. Yet I never realized until recently just
how bitter and prolonged the controversy in
the aftermath of K2 had been.
In 1961, Le Mie Montagne had sent
fireworks into the mountaineering sky
above Italy. But the bombshell came in
1964, in the form of a pair of articles by a
climbing journalist named Nino Giglio that
appeared in the Gazzetta del Popolo, a
widely read magazine. The first article was
titled “After Ten Years, the Truth About K2.”
Giglio claimed that Bonatti had tried to steal
the summit from Lacedelli and
Compagnoni. To enlist Mahdi in this ruse,
he had promised the Hunza the glory of
being the first Pakistani to stand atop K2.
And the reason Lacedelli and Compagnoni
had run out of oxygen short of the summit
was that Bonatti had siphoned off at least
an hour’s worth of the precious gas as he
huddled in his bivouac. In the morning,
according to Giglio, Bonatti dashed down to
Camp VIII, abandoning Mahdi.
At these accusations, Bonatti sprang
furiously to his own defense. He instigated
a libel suit against Giglio, which culminated
in a 1966 trial in Turin. Not only the
journalist but Compagnoni and two other
teammates were called to testify. A
deposition from Mahdi, in Pakistan, was
conveyed to the court. Under oath, Giglio
admitted that Compagnoni was the source
of the incendiary charges.
Bonatti was quick to point out the
impossibility of his having siphoned gas
from the oxygen bottles, for he’d had no
mask or regulator, without which there was
no way to transfer the oxygen to his lungs.
Lacedelli and Compagnoni had the masks
and regulators at Camp IX.
Thus the curious cry at dusk—”Leave the
masks!”—looks like a deliberate falsehood.
It seemed to Bonatti that in misrepresenting
the shouted conversation in the chapter of
Desio’s official book, Compagnoni was
already planting the seeds of the claim that
Nino Giglio would voice ten years later, that
Bonatti had stolen the lead climbers’
oxygen.
The outcome of the trial was total
vindication for Bonatti. Yet the antagonisms
indelibly tarnished Bonatti’s reputation,
especially in Italy. As he told an American
writer in 2003, “It’s stupid, but the whole
world believed Desio and Compagnoni.
Because it’s a rhetorical formula that
climbers always tell the truth.”
If his K2 experience bred a lasting sense of
mistrust of others, Bonatti was still
determined to get some kind of revenge for
his mistreatment by Lacedelli and
Compagnoni. That revenge took the form of
solo climbing, at a level of daring that was
decades ahead of his time. In August 1955,
Bonatti tackled the southwest face of the
Petit Dru, above Chamonix.
Virtually no routes anywhere in the world
that were, for their time, at the edge of the
impossible had ever been attempted solo.
Bonatti’s six-day ascent of the pillar that
would be named for him nearly cost him his
life. But it was so visionary an achievement
that the great British Himalayan climber
Doug Scott later hailed it as “probably the
most important single climbing feat ever to
take place in mountaineering.”
There followed, during the next decade,
other visionary ascents: Gasherbrum IV in
1958, by far the hardest climb yet done in
the Himalaya or the Karakoram. The north
face of the Grandes Jorasses in winter, in
1963. And then, in 1965, on the one
hundredth anniversary of its first ascent, a
new route direttissima, solo, in winter, on
the north face of the Matterhorn.
The last achievement was Bonatti’s swan
song. At the age of thirty-five, he quit
serious climbing overnight. (Virtually no
other top mountaineer has ever ended his
career in such a fashion.) He turned
instead to other fields of
adventure—deserts, rivers, jungles—as he
reported for the magazine epoca, often on
daring solo expeditions.
The boldest of all Bonatti’s projects, during
his miraculous decade, was one that never
happened. After the Dru, he recalled in
2003, “I was in a state of grace. I felt so
strong that I thought I could do anything.
And the name for ‘anything’ was K2.”
For the summer of 1956, Bonatti plotted an
attempt to climb K2 solo, without oxygen. “I
planned it all very precisely,” he said. “I
would take four to six porters to base camp
on the Baltoro Glacier. I had studied the
route. Our fixed ropes were still there. I
would carry only 25 kilos [55 pounds]. I
could be self-sufficient for a week. And I
knew that if I could survive a night in the
open at 8,100 meters without oxygen, I
could go to the summit without oxygen.”
In the end, Bonatti failed to attract any
sponsors who could have given him a shot
at K2 solo, and he was far too poor to pay
his own way. It is hard to appreciate today
just how far ahead of its time Bonatti’s
scheme was. A comparable feat would not
be performed for another twenty-four years,
when Reinhold Messner climbed Everest
solo, without oxygen, in 1980. I can relate
to Bonatti’s impulse: my own frustration
with the lack of cohesion and teamwork on
K2 in 1992 drove me to a solo attempt on
Everest the next year.
Meanwhile, however, Bonatti could not put
K2 behind him. In the end, he would write
three books about his K2 experience,
reprinting document after legal document
as he sought vindication not only in the
courts but in the eyes of the public.
Bonatti had always been convinced that
Lacedelli and Compagnoni had placed their
Camp IX out of sight—among the scattered
rocks at the foot of the summit pyramid,
above a dangerous traverse—in order to
keep him and Mahdi from joining them in
the cramped tent, and perhaps going to the
summit with them the next day. After their
heroic load carry on July 30, however, both
men would have been too exhausted to try
for the top the next day. But a shared tent
could have saved their lives, and certainly
would have prevented the frostbite that left
Mahdi permanently maimed.
Vindication in this respect finally came in
2006, with Lacedelli’s K2: The Price of
Conquest. There the Cortina guide
confessed to the very ruse Bonatti had long
suspected. In Lacedelli’s telling, the whole
thing was Compagnoni’s idea:
I only understood later…. I believe he didn’t
want Bonatti to reach us. When I saw
Bonatti come towards us I asked
Compagnoni why he didn’t want him to
reach us and he said that it was just the
two of us that had to make the final climb to
the summit.
Lacedelli also confirmed that he and his
partner had the crucial masks and
regulators in their tent, and thus that the
accusation that Bonatti had siphoned off
oxygen was spurious.
Bonatti also never believed that Lacedelli
and Compagnoni had used up their bottled
oxygen and gone on to the summit without
its aid. That was a myth, he believed,
intended to make the summit push more
dramatic. And after the 1964 accusations
came out, Bonatti realized how the tale of
running out of oxygen fed into the
imputation that he had siphoned off gas
during his bivouac, leaving less than
enough for the summit duo.
In K2: The Price of Conquest, however,
Lacedelli still insists that he and
Compagnoni ran out of oxygen on the way
up but carried the useless bottles all the
way to the summit. By 2006, however,
Bonatti had a new ally, in the curious form
of an Australian surgeon and armchair
climber named Robert Marshall, who had
become fascinated by the controversy.
Marshall taught himself Italian just so he
could become a close student of the
episode, met Bonatti, and eventually put
together the definitive casebook of Bonatti’s
side of the story, published in the United
States in 2001 in Bonatti’s valedictory work,
The Mountains of My Life.
Marshall contributed several key new
insights to the muddled affair. Analyzing the
rate of climb of the summit pair, and taking
at face value their claim to have started
upward on July 31 at 6:15 in the morning,
he calculated that through nine and a half
hours of climbing with gas, Lacedelli and
Compagnoni would have averaged 168
vertical feet per hour. Then, from 26,700
feet to the summit, suddenly bereft of
oxygen but carrying the weight of the
useless bottles, they miraculously
increased their pace to 320 feet per hour.
This goes against everything other climbers
have reported about progress at such
altitudes with and without supplementary
oxygen—just as it goes against my own
experience. The higher you go, especially
without supplemental oxygen, the slower
you go. There’s simply not enough oxygen
to feed your muscles, so each step
becomes more difficult than the previous
one.
Even more damningly, Marshall stumbled
upon a pair of summit photos published in
1955 in the Swiss anthology The Mountain
World, although not in Ascent of K2. One
shows Compagnoni with his oxygen mask
still on his face. The other is of Lacedelli,
maskless, but with exactly the sort of ring of
congealed ice on his mustache and beard
that would have formed around a mask he
had just removed. This discovery
demonstrated almost beyond a doubt that
the story of running out of oxygen was a lie.
In 2003, an American writer questioned
Lacedelli about these discrepancies. “We
were using German-made Drager bottles,”
the Cortina guide answered. “We didn’t
know how to regulate them properly. We
had too much oxygen—it burned our
throats, and we bled from the mouth. That’s
why we ran out.” This did not speak to
Marshall’s point about the faster pace the
two men would have had to manage after
running out of oxygen.
Lacedelli also offered a new explanation for
why they didn’t chuck the apparatus to
lighten their loads: “I couldn’t take the
bottles off because my fingers were
frozen.” I don’t buy that reasoning, either.
It’s the simplest thing in the world to take
off the oxygen crate.
Asked about the seemingly incriminating
summit photos published in The Mountain
World, Lacedelli answered, “Compagnoni
put his mask on for just five minutes, to
warm his breathing. I just put up my hand. I
didn’t want cold air in my throat.” That, too,
doesn’t make sense. If you put a mask on
your face when you’re not getting oxygen
through it, it’s like breathing into a plastic
bag. If you did it for five minutes, you’d
probably pass out.
The American writer further probed
Lacedelli about the strange cry at dusk,
“Leave the masks!” In the original Italian
edition of Desio’s book, the key phrase is
“Lascia i respiratori!” Strictly speaking,
“respirator” refers to the whole apparatus,
gas mask and regulator included. Had
Lacedelli meant the bottles alone, he would
have cried, “Lascia le bombole!”
“What did you say when you called out to
Bonatti at dusk?” the writer asked.
“Lascia le bombole!” Lacedelli answered
guilessly. “Leave the bottles! Go down to
Camp VIII!”
“Lascia i respiratori!,” then, must have been
Compagnoni’s deliberate lie in 1954, as he
was already planting the charge he would
make through Nino Giglio ten years later,
accusing Bonatti of siphoning off the
precious gas in his bivouac.
At his worst, Ardito Desio emerges from the
story of K2 in 1954 as a pompous dictator,
a self-important and somewhat mad
scientist, even a semicomic figure. If there’s
a villain in the story, I’m afraid it would have
to be Achille Compagnoni.
At the end of his interview with the
American writer in 2003, Lacedelli sounded
a wistful note. “For a long time after the
expedition,” he said, “I was friendly with
Bonatti. Then we stopped writing and
telephoning. I haven’t seen him in 25
years.”
Lacedelli sighed. “This was not war.
Millions of people fight wars, and then
shake hands afterwards. I hope one day to
shake hands with Bonatti.”
When all is said and done, what lingers
about the first ascent of K2 is the feeling of
just how sad a story it is. What should have
been a great collective triumph ended up in
backstabbing and endless controversy. The
British team on Everest the year before had
made its first ascent as a harmonious team.
Decades later, the members of that
expedition were still getting together in
North Wales for reunions where they did a
little climbing and a lot of nostalgic
reminiscing.
Needless to say, the Italian K2 team never
had a reunion. Instead, some of its
members ended up suing each other.
(Desio even went so far as to sue his own
cinematographer, Mario Fantin, claiming
that he’d withheld several reels of 16-
millimeter film.) And in January 1955, all
the team members except Compagnoni
and one other climber signed a letter of
protest against Desio’s book, claiming it
was full of distortions and outright lies. The
first ascent of K2 may have been embraced
by the Italian public as a great national
triumph, but for the climbers, the victory
was bittersweet at best.
Back in the States, Bob Bates and Charlie
Houston learned of the Italian triumph on
K2. Bates took the news philosophically.
But for Houston, the ascent was deeply
disturbing. He had already been granted a
permit for a 1955 expedition, and, as he
later recalled, “I thought that the third time
we must succeed.”
Within a day after learning of the Italian
success, Houston (in the words of his
biographer Bernadette McDonald)
“wandered into the local hospital in
Nashua, forty miles from [his home in]
Exeter, with no idea of who or where he
was and with absolutely no identification on
him.” Diagnosed with global amnesia,
Houston was admitted to a hospital. A
psychiatrist friend who visited him found
him “weeping inconsolably,” with his shortterm
memory gone. The shock of the news
about K2’s first ascent had apparently sent
Houston over the edge.
He was soon restored to his wife and
home, but it took him several weeks to
recover. That autumn, Charlie Houston quit
climbing for good.
7
THE DANGEROUS
SUMMER
The second ascent of Mount Everest came
in 1956, only three years after Hillary and
Tenzing, when a Swiss party climbed the
highest peak in the world and made the first
ascent of neighboring Lhotse, the fourthhighest.
The second ascent of K2 came
only in 1977, twenty-three years after
Lacedelli and Compagnoni. If anything, that
second ascent represented logistical
overkill far exceeding even Desio’s 1954
extravaganza. The team of Japanese in
1977 had no fewer than fifty-three
members and 1,500 porters! The climbers
ascended via the Abruzzi Ridge and, like
the Italians, used bottled oxygen up high. In
early August, seven members reached the
summit. One positive note was that for the
first time a native Pakistani, the Hunza
Ashraf Aman, also topped out.
The Japanese expedition, however, was
viewed by mountaineers around the world
as a throwback. Jim Curran writes in K2:
The Story of the Savage Mountain,
This, then, was the long-awaited second
ascent of K2: a total anticlimax.
If it proved anything it was that with enough
money and manpower success was almost
guaranteed…. Even in 1977, the expedition
was seen as a dinosaur, totally out of step
with the current thinking epitomised by
Messner and Habeler two years earlier [on
their landmark alpine-style ascent of
Gasherbrum I by a new route].
The allure of Everest diminished almost not
at all after its first ascent. Between 1954
and 1975, no fewer than seventeen
expeditions attacked the mountain, their
nationalities ranging from Indian to
Argentine to Spanish to American to
Japanese to Chinese. During that same
twenty-two-year period, not a single major
expedition ventured onto K2.
The main reason for that neglect was that,
thanks to political turmoil, Pakistan closed
the Karakoram to climbing from 1961
through 1974. But the intrinsic difficulty of
the mountain also loomed as a prohibitive
factor.
With the reopening of the Karakoram,
Americans renewed their pursuit of K2,
sending powerful parties in 1975 and 1978.
The first attempt, which tackled the
complex northwest ridge, was thwarted by
route-finding problems and hideous internal
dissension. It was this expedition that
Galen Rowell chronicled in his tell-all book
In the Throne Room of the Mountain Gods.
The 1978 team was likewise torn with
dissension, but finally placed four
Americans on top. Jim Wickwire, John
Roskelley, Lou Reichardt, and Rick
Ridgeway—superb mountaineers, all
four—made the third ascent of K2 via the
long and intricate northeast ridge, which
had been attempted before but never
completed. (For the top 2,000 feet, the
Americans’ route coincided with the Abruzzi
route.) Three of the four reached the
summit without supplementary oxygen.
Though they’re a bit older than I am,
Wickwire and Roskelley became good
friends of mine. Both of them were on the
1989 Kangchenjunga expedition with me,
although they left the team early without
reaching the summit—Jim because he
developed a bad case of pneumonia, John
essentially because he got fed up with the
way the expedition was being run.
Ridgeway’s memoir about the 1978
expedition, The Last Step, also a tell-all
inside account, was one of the books I
devoured before I went to K2 in 1992. The
sordid details of the team’s interpersonal
conflicts that Ridgeway captured are not
the sort of thing I’d commit to print myself,
but I found them fascinating all the same.
During the first years after the embargo
ended, Pakistan limited the expeditions on
K2 to one a year. The Ministry of Tourism,
however, couldn’t help noticing what the
Nepalese were doing with Everest, granting
permits to multiple expeditions within a
single year. Since that’s such an obvious
moneymaker for the government, it’s a
wonder the Pakistanis didn’t start the
practice sooner.
By the early 1980s, K2 was “hot” in
mountaineering circles. Four expeditions
focused on the mountain in 1982, four
again the following year, and four in 1985.
In 1986, Pakistan at last opened the
floodgates. That year, no fewer than eleven
separate parties would congregate on the
slopes of K2.
Meanwhile, in the years from 1978 through
1985, the mountain witnessed six more
fatalities. There was Nick Estcourt from the
British team in 1978, buried by an
avalanche. The next year, two Pakistanis
died, one of a heart attack, one by falling
into a crevasse. In 1982, a Pole also died
of a heart attack, and a Japanese climber
fell on the descent after reaching the
summit by a new route, the north ridge.
And in 1985, a Frenchman died on the
descent of the Abruzzi Ridge.
By the end of 1985, then, thirty-nine men
(but no women) had reached the summit of
K2, while twelve had died trying. With the
summer of 1986, that ratio would become
much worse.
There were two American teams on K2 that
year. One of the ironies in my life that I’ll
never stop thinking about is that I was
invited on one of those two expeditions,
before I’d ever been anywhere in the
Himalaya or the Karakoram. In 1986 I was
twenty-six years old, in my fourth year of
guiding during summers at Rainier
Mountaineering, Inc. (RMI), but during the
school year I was getting my doctorate in
veterinary medicine at Washington State
University. One of my RMI colleagues was
a guy named John Smolich who’d been to
Everest in 1984. John was a phenomenally
strong climber, but he came across as softspoken
and gentle. I really respected him.
John was the leader of an eight-man team
from the Pacific Northwest. They were
superambitious: instead of the classic
Abruzzi Ridge, they were aiming at the
beautiful, unclimbed route on the south
face that Reinhold Messner had called the
“Magic Line.” Sometime that winter, John
invited me to join the team. Andy Politz,
another RMI guide, was also on board. He
was an even closer buddy, the guy I’d
bailed off Rainier with in a winter storm,
when I survived the only unplanned
bivouac of my life. Andy and I had also
invented our “load wars”—an ongoing
competition to see who could carry the
most groceries to Camp Muir while guiding
clients. And in 1983, Andy and I had served
as junior guides under Phil Ershler on an
RMI-led ascent of Denali—my first
expedition ever.
I was deeply flattered to be invited to K2,
and sorely tempted. There was no way,
however, that I could skip out of my
summer externship at Washington State.
With great regret, I turned down the
invitation.
The Americans had been at base camp for
only three weeks when, on June 21,
Smolich and teammate Alan Pennington
started up the approach gully at the base of
the Magic Line. Almost immediately, at 5:30
in the morning, they heard a loud roar.
Morning sun striking the face had dislodged
a huge boulder thousands of feet above.
(That boulder had been considered so
stable that on a previous foray up to Camp
II, some of the team members had
anchored a fixed rope to it.) The boulder
started careening down the route. When it
hit the top of the approach gully, it triggered
a 15-foot fracture line that set loose a
massive avalanche. Smolich and
Pennington tried to run for it, but they didn’t
have a chance, and they were engulfed in
tons of snow and ice debris.
Their teammates dug out Pennington, but it
was too late to save his life. John’s body
was never found. After burying Pennington
near the Gilkey-Puchoz memorial, the rest
of the team abandoned the expedition and
headed home.
John was the first guy I’d known personally
who’d died in the Himalaya. (I didn’t know
Alan Pennington.) Later I dug out pictures
of the route and tried to figure out if I could
learn anything from the catastrophe. But in
the end, I had to admit that the death of the
two climbers was the result of sheer bad
luck. If ever there was a pure case of what
we climbers call “objective danger,” it was
that freak avalanche triggered by the
boulder.
It’s true that on big mountains, the very
lowest slopes can be among the most
dangerous. In 1999 on Shishapangma,
Alex Lowe, considered by many to be the
best climber in the world, was killed with his
partner Dave Bridges in a very similar
accident, as they strolled out to reconnoiter
a route they eventually hoped not only to
climb but to ski down. An avalanche broke
off thousands of feet above them. Lowe
and Bridges tried to run for it, but were
smothered by the debris. Their bodies, like
Smolich’s, were never found.
But what can you learn from such grim
accidents? If you want to climb an 8,000er,
sooner or later you’re going to be kicking
steps up an approach gully that just might
avalanche.
Smolich and Pennington happened to be in
the wrong place at the wrong time. It could
have happened to me.
None of the other ten teams on K2 in 1986
even considered giving up their attempts
after the disaster on the Magic Line. But
climbers who didn’t know the two victims
gathered from many different parties to
attend the impromptu funeral service on the
glacier for Smolich and Pennington, and
they were moved by it. John Barry, one of
the best climbers on a British team
attempting the unclimbed northwest ridge,
later described the service in K2: Savage
Mountain, Savage Summer. After
Pennington’s body was lowered into a
natural “sarcophagus,” Barry wrote,
An American made a dignified little speech
rounding off with a Mallory quotation to the
effect that we eat and make money to
live—not the other way around. It was a
quotation equal to the occasion. A second
American, Chelsea, their Base Camp
Manager, said something plain, sensible
and suitable too. Everyone was holding up
well. Then their doctor spoke. He got three
words into his bit and broke down, and
brought a few others down with him too.
But it was a fine funeral, if a funeral can be
fine, and K2 is as good a headstone as any
parish slate.
Among the scores of climbers on different
teams trying K2 in 1986, you could have
assembled an international all-star cast.
The Pole Jerzy Kukuczka was locked in a
battle with Reinhold Messner to become
the first man to reach the summit of all
fourteen 8,000ers. K2 would be his
eleventh such success, putting him only
one peak behind Messner. The great
Tyrolean mountaineer, however, aced out
Kukuczka by knocking off his last two,
Makalu and Lhotse, in the autumn of 1986.
It was hardly a match waged on a level
playing field. By 1986, Messner was the
most famous climber in Europe, perhaps in
the world. He had multiple sponsors,
received large fees for speaking
engagements, and earned royalties from a
string of books he’d written. Messner is
without question one of the greatest highaltitude
climbers of all time, as he
demonstrated with breakthrough ascents
on Everest in 1978 with Peter Habeler,
without supplemental oxygen, and again on
Everest solo and oxygenless two years
later. But in the highly competitive circles of
Himalayan aficionados, many observers
pointed out that Messner usually chose the
standard routes on the 8,000ers.
Kukuczka, like most Polish climbers, could
barely afford each expedition he went on.
But what was most admirable about his
campaign on the 8,000ers—in 1987, he
became the second person to claim all
fourteen—was that he almost never opted
for the easiest route. Ten of his ascents of
the highest peaks were by new routes, and
four came in winter—including the first
winter ascent of Annapurna, an
achievement that still awes me, twenty-two
years later. Sadly, Kukuczka died near the
top of the unclimbed south face of Lhotse in
1989, when a rope broke. It’s a dreary
testament to this great mountaineer’s
continued poverty that the rope was a
cheap six-millimeter cord he had picked up
in a market in Kathmandu.
In 1986, Kukuczka was determined to climb
a new route up the center of K2’s south
face. And he intended to pull off this deed
alpine-style, with but a single fellow Pole as
his partner.
Clear on the other side of K2, climbing out
of China rather than Pakistan, a very strong
American team was attempting the north
ridge. Its members also included several
superstars, among them Alex Lowe,
George Lowe (no relation to Alex), Dave
Cheesmond, and Catherine Freer,
considered the best American woman
alpinist of her day. Despite having such
experts along, the team had to turn back a
little above 26,500 feet, defeated by storms
and terrible snow conditions. As mentioned
above, Alex Lowe would die on
Shishapangma thirteen years later. And
Cheesmond and Freer vanished in 1987,
on an incredibly bold two-person alpinestyle
attempt on the Hummingbird Ridge of
Mount Logan, in Canada. Speculation had
it that their tent, pitched on a narrow curl of
the relentlessly steep and twisting ridge,
broke loose with a cornice that collapsed,
sending them hurtling to the glacier
thousands of feet below. Their bodies, like
Lowe’s, were never found.
Another all-star on the mountain in 1986
was the Frenchman Benoit Chamoux. His
project was to climb the Abruzzi faster than
anyone ever had before. If you wonder just
how dangerous trying to climb all the
8,000ers really is, you should contemplate
the fates of Kukuczka and Chamoux. In
1995, the Frenchman would disappear near
the summit of Kangchenjunga, which would
have been his fourteenth and last 8,000er.
The scuttlebutt had it that Chamoux wanted
Kangchenjunga too badly, as he was
running head-to-head with the Swiss
mountaineer Erhard Loretan for the honor
of being the third man to nail the whole list.
Yet another climbing celebrity was the
Italian Renato Casarotto. His K2 plans
were probably the most ambitious of
anybody’s that summer. The Magic Line on
the south face had repulsed a number of
previous attempts. Casarotto wanted to
make its first ascent solo.
At age fifty-four, the Austrian Kurt
Diemberger was well past his prime, but by
1986 he was a mountaineering legend.
Way back in 1957, he had paired with
Hermann Buhl (the man who had made the
first ascent of Nanga Parbat solo four years
earlier) and two other Austrians to become
the first climbers to reach the top of Broad
Peak, the twelfth-highest mountain in the
world. Theirs was an admirably lightweight
assault, accomplished virtually alpine-style,
that set a new standard among the
8,000ers. Only eighteen days after
summitting on Broad Peak, however, as
Diemberger and Buhl retreated from nearby
Chogolisa in a gathering storm, a cornice
broke loose, taking Buhl to his death. (Like
those of so many victims in the Himalaya
and the Karakoram, Buhl’s body has never
been found.)
In 1960, Diemberger was a member of a
combined Swiss-Austrian team that made
the first ascent of Dhaulagiri, the world’s
seventh-highest peak. He and Buhl remain
eternally the only two climbers to make the
first ascents of two different 8,000ers. In
1986, Diemberger joined a large team on
K2 to serve chiefly as a filmmaker, but he
wanted very much to reach the summit with
the woman who had become his regular
climbing partner, Julie Tullis from Great
Britain.
The strong British team attempting the
northwest ridge was led by Alan Rouse,
among the elite of his country’s highaltitude
mountaineers. That party had an
additional incentive, for any members who
got to the top would be the first Britishers to
succeed on K2.
In 1975, the Japanese Junko Tabei had
become the first woman to climb Mount
Everest. By 1986, no woman had yet
reached the top of K2. A number of women
had tried, including the Americans Dianne
Roberts, Cherie Bech, and Diana Jagersky
in 1978. But no woman had yet even come
close to summitting. (According to Rick
Ridgeway’s The Last Step, much of the
dissension among the 1978 team sprang
from the conviction among some of the
climbers—notably the blunt, outspoken
John Roskelley—that Roberts had no
business on the mountain, but was along
simply because she was the wife of
expedition leader Jim Whittaker.)
Two women on K2 in 1986 seemed
capable of making the first female ascent.
One was Liliane Barrard from France, who
had previously climbed Gasherbrum II and
Nanga Parbat. The other was the Pole
Wanda Rutkiewicz, widely regarded today
as the finest high-altitude female climber of
all time. Unable to afford an expedition of
her own, Rutkiewicz joined Barrard’s team,
launching a friendly rivalry over which
woman would get to the summit first.
By 1992, Rutkiewicz had summitted on
eight of the fourteen 8,000ers. Many in the
climbing world assumed that she would
eventually join the ranks of the very few
men who had bagged all fourteen. But that
May—how often the paths of such
ambitious climbers lead to the same dismal
outcome!—she disappeared near the
summit of Kangchenjunga, just as
Chamoux would three years later.
Many of the climbers involved in the
“dangerous summer” of 1986 would later
write about it, but only one produced a
comprehensive narrative of all the
confusing events that took place between
June and August. Jim Curran had joined
Alan Rouse’s northwest ridge expedition
primarily as a cinematographer, but also to
write a book, should the team succeed.
Though not at the top level as a
mountaineer, and with no ambitions to
reach the summit, Curran was (and is) one
of Britain’s finest mountaineering writers. In
the end, instead of writing only about his
own expedition, Curran attempted to cover
the stories of all eleven teams on the
mountain, in his deft 1987 chronicle K2:
Triumph and Tragedy.
By the time the avalanche snuffed out the
lives of Smolich and Pennington, Liliane
Barrard’s team was high on the Abruzzi
Ridge. The foursome was led by Maurice
Barrard, Liliane’s husband and inseparable
climbing partner. Along with Wanda
Rutkiewicz, the party was rounded out by
another strong Frenchman, Michel
Parmentier.
Afterward, Rutkiewicz wrote a short
account in Polish of her team’s adventure
on the Abruzzi. (Translated into English, it
is reprinted as an appendix in Curran’s
book.) Rutkiewicz’s report is the only
insider account of what happened to
Barrard’s team.
In the spring of 1986 in Paris, Maurice
Barrard had met with Kurt Diemberger to
discuss the Abruzzi route. In The Endless
Knot, Diemberger’s own account of K2, he
quotes a statement by Barrard that, in view
of what transpired on August 1, 2008, has
an eerie prescience:
“I have serious misgivings about the serac
wall on that hanging glacier,” Maurice had
confided … pointing to a photograph of the
summit pyramid. “It is definitely worse now
than it was in 1979. Look at this latest shot:
the fracture zone along this great balcony
bit looks to have more cracks than ever.
Heaven knows how much will come off and
funnel down through the Bottleneck.”
From the start of their climb, Rutkiewicz got
along so poorly with Parmentier that she
refused to share a tent with him, camping
instead in a small two-man tent she
borrowed from the British. Trying to climb
fast and light through deep, soft snow, the
team managed successive gains of only
650 and 1,300 vertical feet on June 21 and
22. Their last camp was at the remarkable
altitude of 27,200 feet. Rutkiewicz does not
identify the site except to call it “a small
rock platform”—my guess is that it was on
the ramp after the climb of the Bottleneck
and the delicate leftward traverse.
Rutkiewicz wrote, “We spent the night there
… without sleeping bags in a very bad
condition, all four squeezed into one small
tent.”
The climbers had only just over 1,000
vertical feet to climb the next day to reach
the summit, but on June 23 they gained
ground at a snail’s pace. It may be that they
were simply too early in the season, for the
snow on the summit cap stayed relentlessly
deep and soft. Barrard’s team was the first
that year to reach the summit snowfield, so
they had had no fixed ropes to rely on
above about 24,000 feet, and no one had
broken trail ahead of them.
The four climbers left their squalid camp at
7:30 A.M. on June 23. Halfway to the
summit, however, Maurice Barrard made
what seemed to Rutkiewicz a very strange
announcement: “Now we will rest here for a
couple of hours and cook something.” Out
of his pack he pulled a stove, a pot, and
packets of instant soup.
That was indeed a bizarre decision. On
summit day on an 8,000er, every minute
counts. For liquid, you need to sip from a
water bottle you’ve filled that morning or the
night before, which you carry in a chest
pocket to keep the fluid from freezing. I
can’t imagine sitting down at something like
27,800 feet on K2 to brew up soup!
Rutkiewicz felt the same way. “I didn’t want
to stay such a long time there drinking
soup,” she later wrote. “I was in a hurry.
The summit was beckoning. So I left the
others and started out on my own.”
The Pole reached the top at 10:15 A.M.,
becoming the first woman to climb K2. She
wrote a little note, signing it with both her
and Liliane’s names, and placed it in a
plastic bag tucked into some rocks just
below the summit. Given the frictions within
the team, it’s surprising that Rutkiewicz
didn’t immediately head down. Instead, she
waited a long while for her teammates and
then, after they arrived, shared an hour’s
celebration with them on top.
The upshot was that the foursome did not
regain their 27,200-foot camp until late
afternoon. Rutkiewicz was of a mind to
keep heading down, but Maurice Barrard
urged that they spend the night in the
single tent pitched on the rock platform,
and she acquiesced. She would later write,
“I was tired, but not exhausted. The
weather was still good and I was not
worried. But I should have been. One
should remain at that altitude as short a
time as possible. I didn’t know in the
sunshine that death was following us
down.”
To try to sleep, Rutkiewicz took two and a
half Mogadon tablets. As recently as 1986,
climbers routinely popped sleeping pills at
high camps, but it was later discovered to
be a very dangerous practice. Pills such as
Valium and Mogadon continue to depress
one’s pulse rate and other aspects of the
cardiovascular system for twelve hours or
more after waking, which isn’t a good thing
for any athlete, much less a mountaineer at
27,000 feet. I never took sleeping pills up
high, mainly because I wanted to be fully
alert in case a storm blew in during the
night or something else went wrong.
In the morning, Rutkiewicz felt groggy and
her balance was off, but she recognized the
urgency of getting down the mountain.
Parmentier set off first, but both Liliane and
Maurice Barrard seemed completely
lethargic and moved very slowly. The climb
to the summit without supplemental
oxygen, sandwiched between two nights
spent with four people crammed into a
small tent without sleeping bags at 27,200
feet, had taken its physical toll. Soon the
gap between the Barrards and their two
teammates widened. At Camp III, at 25,250
feet, Rutkiewicz caught up to Parmentier.
Several Italians and the Frenchman Benoit
Chamoux were there as well, heading up
on an attempt they would abort the next
day, in the face of a gathering storm. At
Camp III, Rutkiewicz and Parmentier
waited for the Barrards, but they never
arrived. Their teammates were still not
overly concerned, since the French couple
were carrying the tent and could
presumably have pitched it wherever they
found themselves by nightfall.
In the morning, Rutkiewicz headed down,
as did the Italians and Chamoux, but
Parmentier insisted on waiting for the
Barrards. It took the Polish woman three
more days to reach advance base camp.
By then, her hands were frostbitten and she
was near collapse.
In a big dome tent at the Italian base camp,
Jim Curran joined the vigil for the French
climbers. Chamoux had tried to talk
Parmentier into descending with him, but
after the man had refused to abandon his
teammates, Chamoux had given him a
radio.
Eventually, Parmentier had started down in
an all-out storm. At base camp, the
listeners waited and waited beside the
radio. Finally they heard a faint voice: “Ici
Michel, ici Michel” (“Michel here”). Still
above the top of the fixed ropes,
Parmentier was lost in the storm. (One
more example of how willow wands
marking the route can make all the
difference in the world.)
Chamoux got on the radio and did a
remarkable thing: he tried to talk
Parmentier down, giving him the “beta” of
the route from memory. Curran captured
some of the dialogue: “Keep right, keep
right, don’t veer to the left, then straight
down for perhaps two, three hundred
metres … over.” Turning to the others in
the dome tent, with the radio off, Chamoux
said, “He has perhaps a fifty-fifty chance
that he finds the ropes. If not….” Curran
fought back tears.
Hours passed. Parmentier’s voice was
weaker with each short burst of broadcast.
But at dusk, after one more exchange,
Chamoux turned to the others and said,
“He has found piss stains in the snow.”
The piss stains led the played-out climber
to the top of the fixed ropes. Two days
later, Parmentier staggered down to
advance base, where Chamoux met him
and helped him the rest of the way to base
camp.
The Barrards never made it down the
Abruzzi Ridge. A month later, an Austrian
team discovered Liliane’s body at the foot
of the south face. Maurice’s body was
found two years later, in a crevasse on the
Godwin Austen Glacier.
In the appendix to Curran’s K2: Triumph
and Tragedy, Rutkiewicz later coolly
pondered the possibilities:
How did the Barrards die? Possibly part of
the summit serac broke off and hit them as
they climbed down the Bottleneck. Perhaps
the one behind [on the rope], Maurice, was
exhausted and fell, taking Liliane with him.
Perhaps they lost their way on the big
snowslopes below the Bottleneck during
the white-out and were avalanched down
the South Face. I’m sure, too, we stayed
too long at altitude. The cooking on the
summit day, the slow descent from the
bivouac at 8,300 metres [27,200 feet] both
showed that the Barrards were more
exhausted than Michel and I realised.
That’s how accidents happen.
At base camp, Parmentier was overcome
with anguish about the loss of his partners
and about the duty of getting in touch with
their families. But Rutkiewicz, in Curran’s
opinion, was so blase, she seemed in some
kind of denial. He wrote in K2: Triumph and
Tragedy,
Wanda, whose frostbitten fingers were
obviously very painful, seemed to be out of
touch with reality, already planning to climb
Broad Peak, which in her present condition
she was not fit for. Even if she recovered
physically, which at K2 Base Camp
seemed unlikely, she would be risking
much worse frostbite. She sounded vague,
irrational, and quite obsessed with 8,000-
meter peaks.
Yet at the same time, he noted, “I remained
in awe of the strength, skill and
determination of the first woman to climb
K2, and amazed that the experience had
not left her, temporarily at least, satisfied.”
Curran wrote that passage five years
before Rutkiewicz would vanish on
Kangchenjunga, but I think he hit the nail
on the head. A disturbing fanaticism seizes
many of the climbers who decide to go after
all fourteen 8,000ers. That’s a frame of
mind I did my best to avoid during the
eighteen years it took me to complete my
Endeavor 8000, which is partly why, among
my thirty expeditions, I returned from ten of
them without a summit in my pocket. It’s
easy to see how a fixation with getting all
fourteen peaks climbed becomes an
ambitious climber’s driving motivation. As
soon as he or she knocks off one peak,
plans for the next one go on the front
burner. And in some cases, I believe, the
climber’s sense of haste is compounded by
pressure from sponsors or the media.
The end of June 1986 had not yet come,
and already K2 had taken four lives. The
pattern of catastrophe during this
“dangerous summer” would be utterly
different from the tragedies of 1939 and
1953, which struck within the ranks of the
only team on the mountain at the time. It
would be different, for that matter, from the
2008 disaster on K2 or the 1996 debacle
on Everest, each of which burst forth in a
single dramatic two-day event—the
freakish storm of May 10–11 on Everest,
the serac collapse and benightment of
August 1–2 on K2.
Instead, in 1986, one bad situation after
another would develop through the
summer, scarring the mountain with a
series of isolated tragedies. Around each
death, a collective grief would briefly bring
members from the different expeditions
together, as in the funeral service for
Smolich and Pennington or the base camp
vigil for the lost French climbers. But then
the teams would go back to their separate
missions.
Benoit Chamoux had been deeply
concerned about the fate of his
compatriots, and he may have saved
Parmentier’s life by talking him down to the
top of the fixed ropes. But only a week after
that hair-raising episode, Chamoux set off
again up the Abruzzi in quest of his speed
record. Climbing in loose association with
the Italians, whose fixed ropes and blazed
tracks he took advantage of, on July 4–5
Chamoux essentially soloed the mountain,
climbing all the way from base camp to the
summit in the astounding time of twentythree
hours. Instead of stopping to camp,
he climbed straight through the night,
taking short breaks to gulp down food and
swallow drinks. He reached the top at 5:00
P.M. on July 5, spent half an hour there,
then headed down into his second night.
After a short sleep at 24,900 feet with the
Italians, he bombed on down to base camp
the next day.
Chamoux’s performance was dazzling; in
itself, it almost mocked the notion of
climbing an 8,000er by going from camp to
camp on successive days or retreating to
base to gear up for another attempt, as we
had to do in 1992. (“‘Gobsmacked’ was the
only word to describe our reactions,”
Curran wrote.) That summer, Chamoux
was in fantastic shape. Only two weeks
earlier, he had soloed Broad Peak in a
comparable dash, an exploit that had
honed the acclimatization he would need
for K2.
Chamoux’s twin killing was one of the first
examples ever performed in the Himalaya
or the Karakoram of what I would later call
a “twofer” (as in “two for the price of one”).
It turns out to be the most efficient way to
go after 8,000ers, provided you can keep
that edge of fitness and not get worn down
by the sheer exertion of it all. In 1995, I
would pull off my only “threefer,” climbing
Makalu, Gasherbrum I, and Gasherbrum II
in a span of two months, though I had a
two-week break back home between
Makalu and the Gasherbrums. (I would
actually have accomplished a “fourfer” had
we not stopped less than 350 feet short of
Everest’s summit just before my Makalu
expedition.) In 2003, J.-C. Lafaille notched
his own threefer, climbing Dhaulagiri,
Nanga Parbat, and Broad Peak in
succession (the last two with me), although
the pulmonary edema that felled him on the
summit of Broad Peak might have been
partly caused by the sheer intensity of his
campaign.
One of the members of the Italian team
who also reached the summit on July 5 was
a Czech, Jozef Rakoncaj, who three years
earlier had climbed K2 by the difficult north
ridge. Rakoncaj thus became the first man
to climb K2 twice. That’s a remarkable
achievement, too. Twenty-three years later,
only two other men have climbed K2 twice.
Yet I doubt that many K2 aficionados are
aware of Rakoncaj’s feat, or have even
heard of the man.
Meanwhile, Jerzy Kukuczka was gearing
up for his monumental alpinestyle attempt
on the south face—not by the Magic Line,
but along an equally serious and committed
route to the right, or east, of it. Kukuczka
and his Polish teammate, Tadeusz
Piotrowski, had bought their way onto a
massive international team led by the
notorious Dr. Karl Herrligkoffer—in the
same way that Scott and I bought places
on the Russian expedition in 1992.
Herrligkoffer was the German martinet who
had sued Hermann Buhl after the Austrian
had disobeyed his orders and gone to the
top of Nanga Parbat solo in 1953. Seventy
years old in 1986, Herrligkoffer had led
more than twenty expeditions to the
Himalaya and the Karakoram.
In K2: Triumph and Tragedy, Curran
pondered the enigma posed by the German
expedition leader:
An old man whose life had been dominated
by mountains yet who had never been able
to go above Base Camp; a man who
despite his organisational experience,
attracted feuds and controversy on almost
every venture; and a man whose whole
concept of leadership and power seemed
to be profoundly at odds with the people
who continually placed themselves under
his command. Did he, I wondered, actually
enjoy the mountains in the same way that I
did? Did he enjoy the company of
climbers?
Kukuczka apparently shared that
disenchantment. About the rest of the
motley international team, he later wrote,
“Unfortunately, most of the members did
not show enough sporting spirit to attempt
even K2’s normal route. I couldn’t believe
this since on Polish expeditions we always
try to attempt something different.”
Kukuczka had a right to his national pride.
Starting in the 1970s, if any country’s
climbers consistently tried really hard new
routes and pushed them to the limit, it was
Poles, despite their scrawny expedition
budgets. They were and still are especially
adept at winter ascents on the highest
mountains.
In early June 1986, a team of
six—Kukuczka, Piotrowski, three Swiss,
and a German—started working their way
up the south face. The climbing was so
difficult and so scary that one by one all
three Swiss and the German dropped out.
Not until July 7 did the Poles launch their
two-man alpine-style assault. To go as light
as possible, they carried only four pitons
and a 100-foot rope! Kukuczka led every
pitch.
This was by far the hardest climbing that
had been performed to that date on K2,
and it took its toll on those tough men.
Kukuczka spent a whole day mastering a
single desperate pitch. The men had
accidently dropped a gas canister, so their
stove was useless. The first night, all they
had to drink was a small cup of water from
snow melted over a candle.
On the second day, economizing further,
they left behind their tent, sleeping bags,
sleeping pads, and even food. All they
carried was a pair of bivouac sacks and
their cameras. In doing so, they made a
commitment to go up and over the top, then
descend the Abruzzi Ridge, instead of
downclimbing the difficult line they had
ascended. That was a bold yet somewhat
desperate move. By late afternoon,
Kukuczka and Piotrowski reached the
summit snowfield, where they actually
came upon the empty packets of powdered
soup left by Maurice Barrard. Kukuczka
reached the summit of his twelfth 8,000er
at 6:25 P.M., Piotrowski a bit later.
Descending with a single headlamp, the
men had to halt when the bulb abruptly
burned out. They dug a hole in the snow at
around 27,000 feet and settled in for a
second bivouac, “shaking with cold,”
Kukuczka later wrote, “until the morning.”
Growing weaker, desperately thirsty, the
men were able to descend only 1,300 feet
of the Abruzzi Ridge on July 9. They
worried about losing their way on a route
they had never ascended, since they had
no good knowledge of its landmarks. They
endured another bivouac, a night of
“absolute torture.”
By July 10, the two men had gone almost
three days without food or water, and their
bivouac sacks were full of holes. But that
day they spotted the tents of a Korean
party far below, and so knew they were on
route. Below the Shoulder, at about 24,500
feet, very near the slope from which Art
Gilkey had been swept to his death in
1953, in Kukuczka’s telling, “When I asked
Tadeusz for the rope, I discovered that he
had forgotten to bring it with him from the
bivouac.”
Rappelling was no longer an option, and
the men had not yet reached the top of the
fixed ropes. In their exhausted state, they
would have to downclimb every foot of the
way, each man on his own. Kukuczka
wrote in The American Alpine Journal,
I started down with Tadeusz behind me.
The ice was harder than usual. Just after I
warned Tadeusz to go a little to my left, I
saw one of his crampons slip off. When he
tried to bang his other foot into the ice, the
crampon shot off his other boot. I was
directly below him. He fell full force onto
me. I braced and could barely keep my
footing, but I was totally unable to catch
him. He hurtled down over the edge.
In shock, Kukuczka continued the descent
alone. He was so addled that, as he
approached the Korean tents, he later
related, “I was under the strange illusion
that somehow I might see Tadeusz there
alive.”
The tents were unoccupied. Kukuczka
found a radio, but its batteries were dead.
“There was a little gas cookstove and I
drank and ate,” he would recall. “Then I fell
into a deep sleep and woke up the
following afternoon. I had slept for 20
hours.”
Two days later, Kukuczka reached the
Godwin Austen Glacier and stumbled back
to base camp. He had survived only
because, at the time, he was probably the
strongest high-altitude climber in the world.
As a feat of sheer gutsy climbing and
endurance, I can admire Jerzy Kukuczka’s
ascent of the south face and his skin-ofthe-
teeth descent. But what he did on K2
went so far beyond the boundaries of what
I would ever attempt on an 8,000er that I
can’t even imagine participating in such a
climb. My guess is that the reason
Piotrowski’s crampons came off is that he
was too tired, or his fingers were too numb,
to tighten the straps properly. We know that
he was not wearing the newfangled clip-on
crampons but an old-fashioned strap-on
pair. If the straps are cinched tight, those
are actually less likely to twist off than
clipons.
Like so many other Poles in the high
mountains, Kukuczka had stuck his neck
way, way out there—and gotten away with
it. And sadly, like so many great climbers
who take risk to the ultimate, he would cut
his margin too thin only three years later,
on the south face of Lhotse.
The joy Kukuczka had felt on the summit
(“We were both ecstatic,” he recalled) was
canceled by the loss of his partner. “My
experiences on that mountain were too
tragic,” he later noted, ending his account,
“and the price we paid for victory was too
high.”
At base camp Kukuczka embraced Wanda
Rutkiewicz. Stunned by the death of
Piotrowski, one of her dearest friends, she
at last abandoned her own plan—despite
her frostbitten fingers—to try Broad Peak
that summer.
Meanwhile, Renato Casarotto was
attempting the Magic Line solo. His wife,
Goretta, who had climbed Gasherbrum II
with him the year before, served on K2 in
effect as his base camp manager. The two
were in radio contact several times each
day.
Casarotto was motivated by a personal
vendetta as well as by the aesthetic appeal
of the Magic Line. He had been a member
of Reinhold Messner’s 1979 K2 expedition,
on which he had not performed well. What
should have been a private disappointment
became a public humiliation when Messner
disparaged Casarotto in his book about K2:
“I invited Renato Casarotto because I
believed him at the time to be one of the
ablest European climbers…. [But] I felt let
down … by Renato as a climber.” And
according to Jim Curran, at a meeting of
high-altitude climbers in the Tyrol in 1985,
when someone told him about Casarotto’s
ambitions for the next summer, Messner
spat, “He’ll never make it!”
In 1986, Casarotto went after his
monumental goal with admirable
cautiousness. On two attempts, he reached
26,900 feet before turning back because of
weather and dangerous conditions. In mid-
July, he made his third attempt. This time
he got above 27,000 feet, but ferocious
winds once again defeated him. Kurt
Diemberger, who was close friends with the
Casarottos, overheard a radio conversation
from that third attempt, which he quoted in
The Endless Knot:
GORETTA: How are you feeling, Renato?
RENATO: I’m OK … fine, really. So far. But
I’m tired now. and so fed up with this whole
business that I’d like to pack it in, come
down, get away from here.
On July 16, Casarotto headed down once
more. He had been on K2 for two months
and had come within only about 1,000 feet
of the summit, but he had promised Goretta
that the third attempt would be his last.
Once he got back to base camp, the pair
would pack up and head for home.
Slowly and carefully, Casarotto descended
the dangerous route. At last he reached the
foot of the face and started to trudge across
the glacier toward base camp.
Standing beside his own tent, Diemberger
saw “a small dot … actually more of a
comma” approaching from a little more than
a mile away. He continued to watch: “Now
the comma was moving forward almost
horizontally across the plateau—there!
Then, suddenly, it vanished. Wiped out. I
rubbed my eyes in amazement and peered
again. Nothing. Nothing at all. Yet I hadn’t
dreamt it, had I?”
With his decades of mountaineering
experience, Diemberger feared the
worst—that Casarotto had fallen into a
crevasse. Hesitantly, he approached
Goretta, who had been waiting for the
scheduled evening radio call from her
husband. “Ciao, Kurt, what’s the matter?”
she greeted him.
“Renato—where is he now?” Diemberger
asked.
“Still on the ridge.”
For a moment, I felt relief. Then fear
clutched at my heart again: somebody was
on the glacier … if not Renato, then who?
…
“It’s just that I saw someone, something,
further down.” I didn’t want to say more
than that.
Diemberger persuaded Goretta to try the
radio. “The next moments will stay with me
forever,” Diemberger later wrote.
“Goretta, I have fallen …,” said the weak
voice. “I am dying … please send help
quickly.”
Diemberger and several Italians grabbed
ropes and gear and dashed toward the
invisible crevasse. Along the way, one of
the Italians managed to keep up radio
contact with Casarotto. Then the rescuers
saw the telltale hole in the glacier. The
crevasse was only a couple of feet wide,
and the snow bridge that had broken
beneath the soloist lay right on a
wellbeaten path that many others had
blithely hiked during the previous weeks.
An Italian rappelled into the crevasse.
Narrow it might have been at the top, but it
swelled beneath the surface into a
monstrous cavern. One hundred and thirty
feet down, the Italian found Casarotto
“leaning against his rucksack in total
darkness, with water running everywhere.”
The two men embraced, and the rescuer
put a waist harness on his stricken
comrade.
Even with several men hauling on different
ropes, it is a very difficult task to pull an
inert victim out of a crevasse. Because the
ropes tend to cut into the snow on the lips
of the fissure, they must be run over ice
axes laid flat near the edge. It took several
attempts before the men could hoist
Casarotto almost to the surface. By then,
he was unconscious.
Once they got him onto the level glacier,
the rescuers wrapped Casarotto in sleeping
bags. An Italian shined a headlamp on the
victim’s face. His eyes flickered briefly. He
was still alive.
But moments later, he was dead. Internal
injuries from the fall had doomed him from
the moment he’d landed on the snow ledge
in the darkness, 130 feet down.
Word of her husband’s death was carried
down to Goretta. She started up the glacier
to say good-bye to Renato, but changed
her mind halfway there and returned to
base camp. Before leaving the scene of the
accident, the men who had tried to rescue
Casarotto dropped his body back into the
crevasse. To nonclimbers, that may seem
like a brutal act, but it’s the most common
grave for mountaineers in the great ranges.
On an 8,000er, it’s almost logistically
impossible to carry a dead climber back to
base camp, somehow summon a helicopter
to lift the body back to the nearest village,
and then arrange to ship it home. (It’s been
done in a few rare cases, among them that
of Chantal Mauduit, my friend from K2,
after she died on Dhaulagiri in 1998.)
There are worse places to be buried than in
a crevasse at the foot of a great mountain.
If I had died on some 8,000er, I wouldn’t
have minded too much if my friends had
consigned me to the nearest crevasse. It
would have been much easier for everyone
involved to leave me on the mountain. It
wouldn’t have made sense for them to go
to all the trouble and expense (not to
mention paperwork!) of bringing me home
just so I could be buried on U.S. soil.
The British team had gathered at base
camp upon learning of Casarotto’s demise.
Jim Curran wrote, “I mumbled my
condolences to Goretta, lost for words.”
With dignified control, she answered in
English, “Please thank your friends for
trying to help to save my husband.”
Is there anything to be learned from
Casarotto’s death? Perhaps, after the
ordeal of safely descending thousands of
feet on the Magic Line, once he reached
the glacier, he let down his guard. One of
my favorite mountaineering mottos is
“Crevasses don’t care if you’re a pro or
not.” The crevasse into which Casarotto fell
was so narrow on the surface that he could
easily have jumped across it. But snow
bridges are fiendishly deceptive: they often
look exactly like any other harmless patch
of glacial surface. If you’re going to try to
solo an 8,000er, you almost have to cross
crevasses on snow bridges that could
collapse under your weight. A number of
great mountaineers have died falling into
crevasses—including Louis Lachenal, the
conqueror of Annapurna, who perished in
1955 on a routine ski descent of the Vallee
Blanche above his home town of
Chamonix. And ever since my close partner
J.-C. Lafaille disappeared high on Makalu
on a solo winter attempt in 2006, I’ve
thought that his death was most likely
caused by his falling into a crevasse. Even
a lifetime of climbing experience is no
safeguard against a hidden crack in a
glacier.
I’ve always been supercautious about
crevasses, roping up where other climbers
blithely travel solo, as I did on every trip
through the funky icefall just below the foot
of the Abruzzi Ridge. On my only solo
expedition, to the north side of Everest in
1993, I dealt with the crevasses by wearing
snowshoes or skis whenever I could,
thereby spreading my body weight over a
larger surface. I also made sure to climb
the glacier only in the predawn cold, when
its surface was as hard as it gets. Even so,
traveling alone on the glacier was probably
the scariest part of the climb, since I had so
little control over what might happen.
Some of my climbing friends are
astonished to learn that despite all the
expeditions I’ve been on, I’ve never fallen
into a crevasse. I’ve plunged into holes up
to my waist several times, but always
caught myself with my arms and managed
to extricate myself without breaking loose
more of the snow bridge and taking a nasty
plunge. (And believe me, the insides of
crevasses are nasty places!) The absence
of crevasse falls on my mountaineering
resume is partly just sheer luck, but I like to
think it’s mainly the result of my healthy
respect for those hidden death traps.
The latest tragedy sent shock waves
reverberating all over the mountain. As Jim
Curran would write:
For many of us the death of Renato
Casarotto was the last Straw…. The
circumstances were so harrowing that I felt
it was surprising that anyone had the
willpower to stay on, yet even after six
deaths some of us felt that there couldn’t
possibly be any more and that going home
wouldn’t change anything. And so, as July
dragged on and the warm, wet monsoonlike
weather kept everyone at Base Camp,
the remnants of nine expeditions re-formed
and regrouped for one last big effort.
On August 3 and 4, however, two more
deaths occurred. One was the result of an
almost absurd fluke: Mohammed Ali, the
sirdar of the Pakistani high-altitude porters
for a Korean team trying the Abruzzi Ridge,
was making a routine shuttle between
advance base camp and Camp I, on the
lowest slopes of the spur, when a falling
stone struck him in the head, killing him
instantly.
The other accident occurred at the end of
yet another epic ascent. After the deaths of
Smolich and Pennington on the Magic Line,
and of Casarotto on the glacier just below
it, another team, made up mostly of Poles,
went to work on that route, which was
already being called K2’s “last great
problem.” At the end of an epic struggle,
three members completed the route,
arriving nearly exhausted on the summit at
6:00 P.M. on August 3. The trio decided to
descend the Abruzzi Ridge rather than the
Magic Line. Just before midnight, the men
were rappelling fixed ropes that had been
recently strung up the Bottleneck couloir by
the Korean team. Coming last was
Wojciech Wro, an experienced Himalayan
veteran making his third attempt on K2.
In the dark, his teammates noticed a “onemeter
gap” between the bottom of one fixed
rope and the top anchor of the rope below
it. They warned each other about the gap,
and the first two men reached the bottom
end of the last rope without mishap. Only a
relatively easy snow slope lay between
them and Camp IV, on the Shoulder.
The two men waited for Wro to join them.
The expedition leader later reported,
“Suddenly they heard the noise of a fall.
They feared the worst, but, exhausted,
could do nothing more than to wait.” Wro
never appeared. His partners could not be
sure what had happened, but they guessed
that Wro must have rappelled off the end of
the rope above the one-meter gap. There
was nothing the two men could do but head
on down themselves.
At base camp, a bitter argument broke out
between the Polish and the Korean team
leaders about the placing of the ropes and
the one-meter gap. Curran’s view was
more philosophical: “The Poles should not
have been relying on the Koreans’ fixed
ropes in the first place. But when the ropes
were there and others were using them, it
would be ridiculous to expect them to
ignore them, either on purist or practical
grounds.”
I think all this blame casting misses a more
basic point. What happened to Wro is what
happens to climbers when they’re pushed
to the very limit. If you have to call on your
last reserves just to get down a mountain,
it’s the easiest thing in the world to make a
simple mistake, like rappelling off the end
of a rope in the dark. In forging the first
ascents of the south face and the Magic
Line, the Poles proved they were the
toughest climbers on the mountain in 1986.
But both Wro and Piotrowski paid for their
brilliant conquests with their lives.
Like Kukuczka and Piotrowski, the trio on
the Magic Line had climbed a route so
difficult, and had so deeply drawn on their
reserves of strength, that their only hope for
survival was to come down an easier route
that had been fixed by others. Some
observers see that as cutting-edge
alpinism, but for me, it’s leaving too much
up to luck. Sometimes you get away with it;
sometimes you don’t.
Another eternal verity about the 8,000ers
cannot be emphasized too much. In
general, more climbers die on the descent
of a great mountain than on the ascent.
The Poles solved all the extreme technical
problems as they fought their way up their
breakthrough routes. It was only on the way
down the relatively easy Abruzzi Ridge,
with almost no gas left in their tanks, that
they came to grief. Thus by the second
week in August, eight climbers had lost
their lives on K2 in a single summer, by far
the deadliest toll in the mountain’s history.
And yet the worst was still to come.
The British team on the northwest ridge
was coming apart at the seams. Besides
the leader, Alan Rouse, the team was
made up of some of the creme de la creme
of British mountaineering: John Barry, John
Porter, Brian Hall, and the infamous
Burgess twins, Alan and Adrian—hippie
iconoclasts who were nonetheless topnotch,
quite conservative mountaineers.
As they attacked an unclimbed route on K2,
with the prospect of becoming the first Brits
to climb the mountain, the team was
buoyed by promises of book and film
contracts. In the middle of the expedition,
the climbers got a letter from the wife of
one of their Himalayan cronies back home,
informing them that the word was out that
the climbers would be knighted by the
queen if they got to the top. This was
apparently a spoof, but such an honor
would not have been inconceivable. After
all, John Hunt and Edmund Hillary had
been knighted after the first ascent of
Everest.
But the team never jelled on the mountain.
Rouse divided his climbers into two
foursomes, infelicitously calling them the “A
Team” and the “B Team.” (He put the
Burgess brothers on separate teams, even
though they were used to climbing
together.) And no one seemed happy with
Rouse’s leadership, which was constantly
vacillating and indecisive. In K2: Triumph
and Tragedy, Jim Curran painted a
basically sympathetic portrait of Rouse, to
whom he was loyal to the end. But John
Barry wrote his own book, called K2:
Savage Mountain, Savage Summer, culled
mainly from his own diary entries, which
are scathing about Rouse:
As a leader, his is an inept performance.
He admits that he wants the commercial
benefits of being a leader but is unwilling to
take the responsibilities that go with
it—mainly the reduction of his chances of
making the summit. Overheard him say that
he’d prefer to go alpine style and abandon
the expedition.
Barry is as gleeful a tell-all narrator as
Galen Rowell and Rick Ridgeway were in
their K2 books. The diary entries paint a
dreary picture of constant bickering: “Big
row. I tell Al-R [Rouse, to distinguish him
from Al Burgess] that I think he’s a fool. Al
goes off to tent in tears. Jim-C[urran]
follows to comfort him. But still there is no
apology or commitment to Wilkie. Wilkie
pulls out.”
The biggest problem for the British
expedition, however, was that despite
repeated efforts, the climbers made little
headway on the northwest ridge. The
intricacies of the route, the misery of the
snow conditions, and the danger posed by
avalanche slopes and precarious seracs
defeated these crack alpinists. The team
reached an altitude of only 24,300 feet
before giving up. The northwest ridge
would finally be climbed in 1991 by a pair of
dedicated French mountaineers, Pierre
Beghin and Christophe Profit, but even
their ascent line deviated onto the north
face high on the mountain.
As early as July 7, Rouse’s party threw in
the towel on the northwest ridge. In his
diary, Barry laconically recorded:
We are quitting the NW Ridge. I’m
disappointed. We have 3 weeks left at
least.
Reasons: team too small … route too long.
Abruzzi a clear run.
By this early date, a number of Rouse’s
teammates had suddenly remembered that
they had job obligations back home. By
ones and twos over the following weeks,
they abandoned the expedition and started
the long hike out. John Barry himself
defected on July 28. As a result, his book is
hugely anticlimactic, the long last chapter
devoted to his humdrum hike back to
civilization rather than to the drama that
would soon unfold on the mountain.
In changing routes from the northwest ridge
to the Abruzzi, Rouse was breaking all the
rules, for his permit covered only the former
route. As Barry wrote, “There’s great
secrecy surrounding our switch to the
Abruzzi. Al-R doesn’t wish to be banned
from Pakistan for ten years; which he says
is what the punishment would be. Phil
[Burke] says that it would be a reward. I’m
beyond caring.”
The Brits had sardonically nicknamed the
mass base camp at the foot of the Abruzzi
“the Strip.” Now, to get on the route
themselves, the climbers still committed to
the mountain transferred all their gear to a
new base camp, as they sneaked past the
Strip, hoping that the various liaison officers
from other teams would not discover their
transgression. The two narratives of the
British expedition start to take on a comic
tone at this point. The whole expedition, in
fact, could have been treated as a comedy
(this seems to have been John Barry’s
intention from the start), had it not ended in
the disaster of early August.
By the beginning of that month, among the
Brits only Al Rouse was still fully committed
to an attempt on K2. Jim Curran would
linger on, but strictly in the role of
chronicler, scarcely climbing above Camp I.
And now Rouse completed his defection
from his own team, as he announced that
he was pairing up with a woman from the
Polish team to climb the Abruzzi. Whether
Rouse and Dobroslawa Wolf (known as
Mrufka, Polish for “ant”) had started having
an affair is pretty much irrelevant. What
matters is that all semblance of
teamwork—except the dogged loyalty of
Curran at base camp—had vanished from
the British expedition.
Kurt Diemberger and Julie Tullis had spent
most of their time so far on K2 filmmaking
for the Italian team to which they were
attached. Calling themselves Quota 8000,
those climbers had started work on the
Magic Line, but after the deaths of
Pennington and Smolich, they had bailed
and switched over to the Abruzzi. Unlike
the British, the Italians claimed they had
obtained permits beforehand for both
routes, though climbers from other teams
were skeptical.
Diemberger and Tullis’s not-so-secret
agenda was to climb K2, rather than simply
make a film about their teammates. They
were an odd pair, the subject of gossip all
over the mountain. Tullis, at forty-seven,
and Diemberger, at fifty-four, were both
married—apparently happily—and
Diemberger’s The Endless Knot
unabashedly credits the help and goodwill
of Terry Tullis and Teresa Diemberger. But
when he writes about the bond between
himself and Julie, passage after passage
reverberates with an intimate passion. For
example:
Each step is a step into boundless
possibility.
Julie says it more simply: wherever I go,
anything is possible.
I say: where anything is possible, there I
go.
That’s why we are together.
Or:
If just one of us, as a conclusion of our first
years together, reached the summit of
K2—wouldn’t that be fulfillment for both?
Even if only one trod the dream summit?
Only one made the dream come true?
Granted, Diemberger has always been a
writer inclined toward the mystical and the
emotional. What matters is not whether
Diemberger and Tullis were lovers (with or
without the knowledge of their spouses) but
whether the very emotionality of their
relationship, like that newly formed
between Rouse and Mrufka, interfered with
good judgment on this dangerous
mountain.
At first, Jim Curran took a slightly jaundiced
view of the Tullis-Diemberger pairing. He
had known Tullis for years, though not well,
through encounters at climbing meets and
festivals in Britain. She struck him as, on
the one hand, “a bright, attractive, and
apparently conventional housewife” and, on
the other, as “a rather bossy ‘head girl.’” He
was not at all sure Tullis was ready for K2,
for “her actual mountaineering experience
was rather limited and certainly had not got
the foundation of Scottish winter and
extreme alpine climbing,” which the best
British alpinists considered mandatory
before one tackled the most serious
mountains.
Diemberger, whom Curran had also known
casually over the years, “radiated a
massive self-confidence, amounting at
times to self-importance.” But at K2 base
camp one day, as Diemberger reminisced
about Broad Peak with Hermann Buhl in
1957, Curran was won over by the legend:
“I was suddenly conscious that here was a
major part of Himalayan climbing history in
the flesh.”
The crux of Curran’s analysis of the bond
between the British woman and the
Austrian man was that Julie, “through her
devotion, almost amounting to heroworship,
of Kurt, had come to see herself
as a world-class mountaineer in her own
right.” And that spelled trouble.
On K2 in 1992, despite my undeniable
attraction to Chantal Mauduit, and even as I
wondered whether she was flirting with me,
I had no intention of getting involved with
her during the expedition. My own
concentration and commitment, I absolutely
believed, depended on having no
relationship with another climber that might
undercut my motivation or cloud my
judgment. All of my energy and focus
needed to be on trying to climb K2.
Anything less could spell failure or even
disaster.
On August 2, Tullis and Diemberger, along
with Rouse and Mrufka and three Koreans,
all reached the Shoulder, at 26,000 feet.
They had been preceded by three
Austrians—Willi Bauer, Alfred Imitzer, and
Hannes Wieser—who that day were
attempting to go for the summit but had to
turn back at 27,500 feet. This created a
serious space problem at Camp IV, where
only three tents stood, normally capable of
housing seven climbers. When the
Austrians returned late that afternoon, they
pleaded to be allowed to jam in with the
others, so that they could make one more
try for the top. At last the Koreans
generously accepted two of the Austrians,
so that night five men slept piled together in
a three-man tent. Rouse and Mrufka invited
the third Austrian into their tent. But
Diemberger refused to share his and
Tullis’s tent, despite (or because of) the fact
that the Austrians were his compatriots.
(Afterward, there would be hard feelings
between Diemberger and Bauer.)
On August 3, the Koreans set out for the
summit. They reached it late in the
afternoon and were overtaken by night on
the descent. Two of the Koreans regained
Camp IV, while the third survived a bivouac
above the Bottleneck, having tied himself
off to a piton. (That same night the three
Poles who had made the first ascent of the
Magic Line came down the Abruzzi, only to
lose Wojciech Wro in the darkness.)
Later, many would wonder why the
“Europeans” (Brits are not, strictly
speaking, Europeans)—Tullis and
Diemberger, Rouse and Mrufka, and the
three Austrians—didn’t go for the summit
with the Koreans on August 3, while the
weather was still fine. The vague
explanation offered by the survivors was
that they needed a day of rest and wanted
to avoid a traffic jam in the Bottleneck.
Another factor may have been that, of all
the teams on the mountain that summer,
the Koreans were felt to be climbing in the
poorest style. Using old-fashioned heavy
logistics, their nineteen-man team had
strung the route with fixed ropes up the
Bottleneck and across the leftward traverse
above it. On August 3, the three
summiteers used bottled oxygen all the
way, the only climbers that season to rely
on gas. Yet the Koreans survived where
others did not.
With the addition of the two Poles from the
Magic Line, the tent situation at Camp IV
on the night of August 3 became drastic.
Showing remarkable magnanimity, Rouse
let the Poles move in with him and Mrufka,
even though that meant that he spent the
night halfway out of the tent, his upper body
nestled in a snow hole. The third Austrian
moved into the Korean tent. Once again,
Diemberger and Tullis refused to
accommodate any of the refugees.
In The Endless Knot, though he
acknowledges the overcrowding problem,
Diemberger never explains why he and
Tullis were unwilling to share their tent—in
fact, he dances so cleverly around the truth
that if you had only his account of the
expedition to go by, you’d never uncover
that selfishness.
It seems clear that the later debilitation of
many of the climbers at Camp IV was partly
a result of the miserable nights they spent
in crowded tents on August 2 and 3. At
26,000 feet, it’s hard enough to sleep in
“normal” quarters, let alone with too many
climbers crammed into too small a tent.
On August 4, the seven “Europeans” set
out for the top. Rouse and Mrufka were the
first out of camp, but they departed only at
dawn, not in the middle of the night, as
Charley, Scott, and I would do six years
later. Despite two nearly sleepless nights,
Rouse was the strongest climber among
the seven, and in fact he broke trail nearly
all the way. Mrufka quickly fell behind. One
of the Austrians, Hannes Wieser, turned
back a short way above Camp IV. Willi
Bauer and Alfred Imitzer caught up with
Rouse not far below the summit and took
over the trail-breaking. They reached the
top at 3:15 P.M., Rouse not long afterward.
After two and a half months on the
mountain, he had finally claimed the first
British ascent of K2.
Tullis and Diemberger had actually set out
from Camp IV before the Austrians, but
they’d quickly been overtaken by Bauer
and Imitzer. The weather was holding
perfect. Diemberger’s account of the
summit climb in The Endless Knot is so rich
in mystical transport that you have to read
between the lines to figure out what was
going on with Tullis and himself. They
climbed roped together, as no one else did,
and they were very slow. Sensibly, they
vowed not to reach the summit later than
4:00 P.M., but by 3:00 P.M. they were still
650 vertical feet below the top.
Suddenly they came upon Mrufka, leaning
immobile against the slope. To their shock,
they saw that the Polish woman was
asleep. Diemberger woke her up and
offered her a candy. “She reacts with
alarm, looking up full of surprise,” he later
wrote. “‘No … Up … I have to go up!” As
Diemberger and Tullis continued on,
Mrufka put on a burst of speed and tried to
pass them. Tullis suggested that she follow
in their tracks, for she was clearly half out
of her mind, but Mrufka blurted out, “I don’t
want to climb behind an old man.”
For long moments, Mrufka flailed away
clumsily on the steep slope above
Diemberger and Tullis, who were terrified
that she would fall and knock them off their
feet, or snag their rope and pull them off.
Eventually Mrufka passed out of sight to
the right.
At 4:00 P.M., Bauer and Imitzer suddenly
appeared, heading down. Diemberger
recounted their conversation.
“Are you sure you still want to go up?”
Bauer asked him.
“It shouldn’t take us more than an hour at
most,” he replied.
“You’re wrong. It took us four hours!”
Diemberger could not believe what he was
hearing. Finally he deduced that Bauer
meant four hours from the top of the
traverse out of the Bottleneck, not from
their present position. (It sounds as though
no one was thinking very clearly that day
high on K2.) Reassured by this
rationalization, Diemberger and Tullis
pushed on, violating their own turnaround
deadline. But first Diemberger asked
Bauer, “Are there any crevasses where you
can bivouac?”
Diemberger was indisputably a world-class
mountaineer, but he was also fifty-four
years old. I suspect that he and Tullis
wanted the summit too badly, and that the
“endless knot” of their interwoven
partnership, combined with hypoxia,
goaded them into making the foolish
decision to push on. In their situation, no
matter how much I might have craved the
summit, if it was after 4:00 P.M. I would
have given it up and descended.
My own turnaround time is an inflexible
2:00 P.M. I’ve never violated that deadline.
And I’ve never had to stop and turn back
because it got too late. It’s all about
planning beforehand and starting early
enough in the day. Too many times I’ve
seen climbers invite trouble just by leaving
for the top too late in the morning.
Diemberger and Tullis reached the summit
at 5:30 P.M. In The Endless Knot, he
recalls that triumph:
The joy! The happiness! We cling to one
another. For this one moment of eternity,
K2—beautiful K2—is ours.
“Julie—the peak we most desired!” I feel
my voice trembling as I look into the big,
dark eyes under the hood….
“Our very special mountain,” she whispers.
It is, it is—our own and very special
mountain.
This sounds like the perfect recipe for an
unfolding disaster. But the most
extraordinary thing about the summit push
on August 4, 1986, is that all seven
climbers made it back to Camp IV in one
piece. On his way down from the top,
Rouse found Mrufka still inching her way
painfully upward. After a heated argument,
he persuaded her to turn around and
descend. At Camp IV, Willi Bauer said
later, “She cried in her tent because she
hadn’t made it to the top…. I told her,
‘Mrufka, be happy that we’re alive.’”
Diemberger and Tullis did not leave the
summit until after 6:00 P.M. By then, the
weather was deteriorating. All the way
down, Tullis was near collapse. Diemberger
went first on the rope to find the route.
Suddenly he heard her call out his name:
she had fallen and was cartwheeling down
the steep slope. Diemberger plunged his ax
in, put his weight on the head, and almost
stopped her fall before he was wrenched
from his stance by the rope. The two fell
several hundred feet, out of control, before
miraculously sliding to a stop.
The only headlamp the pair carried had
failed to work. In the dark, with a belay from
his partner, feeling more than seeing his
way, Diemberger climbed into a crevasse
to scout it for a bivouac site, only to
discover that he was standing on a fastcrumbling
snow bridge. He screamed at
Tullis to pull him out, but, much lighter than
the heavyset Austrian, she could barely
hold him in place. With a desperate effort,
Diemberger clawed his way back to the
surface with his ice ax.
The pair finally bivouacked in a hollow
snow niche they excavated out of the
slope, at 27,500 feet. Since they had left
their rucksack anchored to a piton at the
top of the traverse out of the Bottleneck,
they did not even have the space blanket
Diemberger had stuck in his pack as an
emergency shelter. It was a blessing that
the storm held off until morning, but in the
night both climbers suffered serious
frostbite. At first light on August 5, in a
whiteout, the two started down again, but
they were effectively lost. Zigzagging back
and forth, they finally struck the Korean
fixed ropes and managed to get down the
Bottleneck; in the mist, however, they could
not locate Camp IV. Diemberger began
shouting, and at last Bauer heard his cries
and shouted back, guiding the two stricken
climbers into camp.
Bauer later reported that he had dragged
Tullis on her back the last stretch into
camp, that “her nose and cheeks [were]
quite black showing definite signs of first
degree frostbite,” and that her gloveless
“right hand [was] swollen and bits of flesh
[were] hanging down.” In The Endless Knot
, Diemberger vehemently disputed these
assertions, insisting that Tullis had made it
into camp under her own power.
In any case, Bauer and Imitzer took Tullis
into their tent, the largest of the three at
Camp IV, fed her hot drinks, and tried to
warm her with a spare down jacket.
Eventually she returned to the tent she and
Diemberger had pitched on the Shoulder
on August 2.
Five of the seven climbers ensconced in
Camp IV had reached the summit. To avert
catastrophe, all they needed to do now was
head down the mountain, following a route
that was hung with fixed ropes most of the
way. But the looming storm had finally
arrived. The climbers stayed in their tents
all through August 5. They would not try to
descend, in fact, for another five days.
At base camp, Jim Curran and the other
watchers could only guess what was
happening high on the mountain, for there
was no radio in Camp IV. In the storm, it
would not be possible to climb up the
Abruzzi Ridge to attempt a rescue, and as
day succeeded day, the thoughts of those
below turned dark. On August 5 and 7,
there were lulls in the storm. On the latter
day, Curran could see all the way up to the
Shoulder. He said to the others in base
camp, “If anyone is up, they will be, I
imagine, hot-footing it down.” But no one
arrived that day, or the next, or the next.
What happened at Camp IV from August 5
to 10 is still something of a mystery. Al
Rouse, who had been the strongest of all
seven climbers on summit day, had
repeatedly vowed that one must spend as
few days as possible at 26,000 feet. It
seems that a kind of apathy took hold, the
inevitable concomitant of the hypoxic states
that perhaps all seven had entered on
August 4; and that apathy most likely was
reinforced by the complete exhaustion of
Tullis and Diemberger.
On the night of August 5, winds that
Diemberger estimated at sixty miles an
hour piled heavy drifts of snow against the
walls of the tent he shared with Tullis,
threatening to break the poles. The
Austrian was incapable of punching his way
loose from inside, and by now Tullis was
snowblind as well as shivering with cold. In
the morning, the two called out for help.
First Rouse, then Bauer tried to dig the tent
loose from outside, before giving up in the
blizzard. Their furious ice ax blows tore
holes in the tent fabric, however, forcing
Tullis and Diemberger to abandon their
shelter.
Dashing through the storm, Tullis tumbled
into the Austrian tent, while Diemberger
crawled inside Rouse’s. The man who had
refused to share his tent with the refugees
on August 2 and 3 now had to beg,
“Please, let me in!” Without hesitation,
Rouse and Bauer granted the same mercy
Diemberger had denied others. But now the
misery of overcrowded quarters once again
sapped the willpower of the seven. They
spent another night without leaving their
tents.
During the night, the storm eased up, and
the climbers prepared to make their
getaway in the morning. At first light,
however, as Diemberger later wrote, “there
was no visibility…. With only the one line of
escape, the risk of getting lost in thick fog
or cloud on the Shoulder was great.” So the
climbers stayed put.
In my view, this is a crucial passage. It’s
startling that in all the subsequent
discussion of the 1986 disaster, no one
brought up the question of willow wands.
That was the first thing that leapt to my
attention when I read The Endless Knot
and K2: Triumph and Tragedy before my
1992 expedition. Had the climbers wanded
the route between the top of the fixed ropes
and Camp IV, they could have managed to
get down on August 7, whiteout or no. But
neither Curran nor Diemberger even
mentions this oversight as contributing to
the tragedy.
There’s a curious passage much earlier in
Diemberger’s book, however, that
illuminates the thinking of the “Europeans.”
On the way up to the Shoulder on August
2, he remarks, “I notice that only one of the
bamboo sticks the high-altitude porters
have brought up bears a red pennant; the
other marker flags have either been lost
during the transport along the ridge or have
not yet been fixed. No time to sort that out
now.”
The porters, of course, were Pakistanis
working for the Korean expedition. Why
didn’t it occur to Diemberger and Tullis, or
Rouse and Mrufka, or the three Austrians
to bring and plant their own willow wands?
That’s porters’ work, Diemberger seems to
imply. Even more curiously, on that crucial
slope below the Shoulder, the Austrian
comes across a cached bundle of wands
but declines to pick them up. He recalls, “I
look at the bundle thoughtfully: they’re no
protection against avalanches, that’s for
sure. To put them in now, so near to the
end of our time here, seems pedantic, an
over-scrupulous precaution.”
Of course willow wands are no protection
against avalanches! That’s not what they’re
for. When I first read that passage, I
wondered how such an experienced
mountaineer as Diemberger could have
been so blase about willow wands. Now I
realize, as I said earlier, that’s it’s just not
chic for Europeans to climb with those
garden stakes sticking out of their packs.
And the same goes for Brits: unlike
Americans, they have little or no tradition of
wanding routes in the great ranges to
safeguard a descent in a storm.
Thus on August 7, the climbers at Camp IV
decided against going down in the whiteout
for fear of getting lost. It makes you want to
weep with frustration: a string of willow
wands below Camp IV could have saved
lives.
On the morning of August 8, Diemberger
awoke to hear Bauer’s voice over the wind.
At first he could not make out the words.
He called back for clarification.
“Kurt!” Bauer shouted. “Julie died last
night.”
“It was like a hammer blow,” Diemberger
later wrote. “Alan, at my side, tried to
comfort me. I heard his words without
grasping their meaning.”
Bauer carried Tullis’s body to the
abandoned tent, cut a hole in the roof with
his ax, and deposited the corpse inside it.
As heartless as that may seem, it was
obviously preferable to keeping a dead
body in the cramped Austrian tent.
That same day, August 8, the stranded
climbers ran out of stove fuel. They could
no longer turn snow into pots of life-saving
water. They tried to scoop handfuls of snow
and melt them in their mouths. Many a
person dying of thirst in the cold has tried to
do the same, but it’s a desperate remedy
that doesn’t really work, because the loss
of precious energy in melting the snow
outweighs the minimal gain of liquid.
Meanwhile, Al Rouse, who had been the
strongest of the seven, began to fade.
Diemberger recalled,
Last night was bad, he was thrashing
about, agitated, like a chained animal. He
would lunge suddenly, delirious, quarreling
with destiny. I tried in vain to calm him….
He begs continuously for water, which we
no longer have. I put a piece of slush to his
lips, which he sucks greedily.
The survivors knew better than to hope for
rescue from below. But all through the day
on August 9, they stayed in their tents,
certain that they could not get down in the
ongoing storm. Only the next morning,
when they woke to blue sky (though the
wind was still raging), did they rouse
themselves to action.
Willi Bauer was the motivating force.
“Aussa! Aussa!” he yelled at Wieser and
Imitzer—colloquial German for “Out! Out!”
In the other tent, Diemberger and Mrufka
slowly put on their boots. They knew that
Rouse was now beyond help, but, as
Diemberger put it, “The prospect of leaving
him here is a ghastly one.” Tottering around
outside the tents, he noted, was “like
having to learn to walk again.”
Diemberger paid a last visit to Tullis. He
later wrote, “I cannot see her face. The tent
is half caved-in, but has not collapsed. I
move the sleeping bag sealing the opening,
and put the down jacket over her feet….
For the last time, I touch her—then I leave
her alone.”
By this point, the other four survivors had
already started down, but almost at once,
the catastrophe deepened. Wieser and
Imitzer were able to walk only a little more
than 300 feet before they fell down in the
snow. Mrufka and Bauer desperately tried
to get them back on their feet, but had to
give up.
Only minutes later, Diemberger came upon
the doomed men.
I reach Hannes. He is sitting in the snow,
with his back to me. A few metres further
on Alfred is lying face down on the
furrowed surface, completely still. He must
be dead. Hannes moves his arms weakly,
rowing the air in slow motion…. Then I see
his face. His eyes, blank, stare into space.
He does not see me. I shout his name, but
he does not even move his head.
To save himself, Diemberger, too, had to
leave Imitzer and Wieser behind.
Throughout the early stages of the descent,
Mrufka was stronger and faster than
Diemberger, and the equal of Bauer. But all
three were in a hallucinatory trance. When
Diemberger finally caught up to the other
two, Bauer suddenly asked, “Do you have
anything to eat? Have you brought a
stove?”
“No, of course not,” Diemberger answered
in astonishment. It is a testimony to the
sheer will to live that the three survivors
were able to keep descending over tricky
ground, on a route unsecured by fixed
ropes. Their thoughts were fixated on
Camp III at 24,100 feet, where they
expected to find tents still standing,
perhaps with food and stoves and fuel still
in them. Late that afternoon they reached
the camp, only to find to their horror that ice
avalanches had destroyed everything.
The only blessing was that fixed ropes had
been strung continuously from camp to the
lower slopes of the Abruzzi. But here a
trivial technical detail worked its cruel
mischief. Neither Bauer nor Diemberger
had a descending device, so each man
simply clipped in to the fixed ropes with a
carabiner and went down hand over hand.
Mrufka, however, had a Sticht plate, which
she insisted on affixing to each rope. A
Sticht plate is a good belay tool, but for
rappelling, it’s far less easy to use than a
figure-eight device. At each anchor, Mrufka
had to fiddle arduously with her plate to
disengage it from the upper rope and
attach it to the lower one. Diemberger tried
to persuade her to use a carabiner instead,
but Mrufka either refused or didn’t
understand.
As they forged on down into the darkness,
the two Austrians lost track of Mrufka. They
assumed she was just behind them, but
they would never see her again.
Trailing behind Bauer, Diemberger could
barely hold on to the fixed ropes. He halffell,
half-slid down the cords strung along
the nearly vertical fissure of House’s
Chimney. But at Camp II, he found Bauer in
a tent, melting snow over a stove. The two
men drank as much as they could, then fell
asleep.
It was not until evening of August 11 that
the two refugees completed their descent.
The first person to greet Diemberger was
Jim Curran, who of course hoped it would
be Al Rouse emerging from the high death
trap. According to Diemberger, Curran said,
“You’re safe at last!”
“I’ve lost Julie,” he answered.
Later Curran wrote,
If you had lined up every member of each
expedition and asked yourself who would
survive an ordeal like this, Willi and Kurt
would come at the bottom of most people’s
lists. But in the end their slow, plodding,
energy-conserving approach must have
paid off.
Of the seven climbers who had headed for
the summit on August 4, five had perished.
The toll for the “dangerous summer” had
reached thirteen.
To this day, in the long annals of
mountaineering in the Himalaya and the
Karakoram, only one season on any peak
has ever been more deadly than K2 in
1986. In 1937 on Nanga Parbat, seven
German climbers and nine high-altitude
porters were crushed to death by a
monstrous avalanche as they slept in their
tents at Camp IV. That calamity, however,
occurred in a single instant, as a result of a
collapse of a hanging glacier far above—an
act of God, as it were. In terms of a season
punctuated by one unrelated disaster after
another, snuffing out the lives of some of
the world’s best mountaineers, K2 in 1986
remains unmatched.
The terrible summer had its impact in
mountaineering circles in the United States,
though it did not really reverberate among
the general public. For one thing, “only” two
of the thirteen victims were Americans. The
hue and cry in this country about the
Everest tragedy of 1996 had everything to
do with how many of the principals
involved, from Scott Fischer to Beck
Weathers to Doug Hansen to Jon
Krakauer, were Americans. And though K2
had an able chronicler in Jim Curran, the
British writer did not play a pivotal role in
the drama, as Krakauer did on Everest.
Finally, on K2 there was no simple morality
play to which the public could reduce the
complicated chain of accidents—nothing
like the perversely satisfying “they got what
they deserved” formula so many readers
took away from Into Thin Air.
A lead article in the American Alpine
Journal by Charlie Houston, titled “Death in
High Places,” tried to wring a moral lesson
from the 1986 season. Among other
criticisms, Houston wrote,
Too many of the deaths were avoidable….
Also commonplace were outrageous
behavior, intense rivalry, and disregard of
mountain ethics—which caused several
deaths. Not many years ago some of the
things that were done would have led to
excommunication by the climbing fraternity.
Houston’s strictures were among the first in
a vein that has now become commonplace,
especially in response to the “circuses” on
Everest every spring, as selfishness,
competition, and dehumanization
overwhelm compassion and brotherhood.
The most balanced and comprehensive
coverage of the K2 tragedies in the
American media came in an article in
Outside magazine titled “The Dangerous
Summer,” cowritten by Greg Child (four
years before he would climb K2) and Jon
Krakauer (ten years before he would climb
Everest). For the most part, Child and
Krakauer avoided finger-pointing, but they
ended the piece with a quote they had
elicited from Jim Curran:
“If anything was common to most of the
deaths, it was that a lot of people were very
ambitious and had a lot to gain by climbing
K2—and a lot to lose as well. Casarotto,
the Austrians, Al Rouse, the Barrards were
all—the word that comes to mind is
overambitious. If you’re going to try alpinestyle
ascents of 8,000-meter peaks, you’ve
got to leave yourself room to fail.”
Too many people on K2 last summer, it
would appear, did not.
Twenty-two years later, commenting on the
2008 K2 catastrophe for National
Geographic Adventure, Child would strike a
more sardonic note: “What the
hell—climbing is dangerous.”
In Great Britain and Europe, however, the
K2 season caused a huge furor. The British
press, including some of the climbing
journals, raked the Austrians over the coals
for “abandoning” Al Rouse. This charge
was, of course, ridiculous: by August 10,
Rouse was too feeble even to stand, and it
was all Diemberger and Bauer could do to
get themselves down the mountain.
Likewise, British journals and newspapers
castigated Diemberger for making a martyr
of the supposedly reluctant Julie
Tullis—despite all the evidence that their
“endless knot” was very much a mutual
passion.
Some of the French press went so far as to
blame Michel Parmentier for abandoning
Maurice and Liliane Barrard, even though
he almost lost his own life by waiting for
them as long as he did at Camp III. In the
German-language press, Bauer and
Diemberger, both of whom lost frostbitten
digits to amputation, feuded bitterly, with
the public taking one side or another. Even
the Koreans were scapegoated for climbing
too slowly, in too old-fashioned a style.
On the last page of K2: Triumph and
Tragedy, Curran stepped back from all the
accusations to editorialize:
Exploring and pushing the limits has always
been the name of the game, whether in
rock climbing, alpinism, or Himalayan
mountaineering. But the disastrous summer
of K2 must remain a salutary reminder that
the limits are still there: pushing them is
one thing, ignoring them another.
Mountaineering will never be a safe activity
and would not be worth doing if it were.
That last line is a credo by which all
climbers live. When I look back on the
summer of 1986 on K2, I can see all kinds
of small mistakes that led to fatal
outcomes. But the scenario that most
haunts me is the picture of those seven
climbers stranded at Camp IV waiting, day
after day, when they must have known that
their only hope of getting off K2 alive was to
head down at once. It reminds me of a very
wise saying about mountaineering that my
wife, Paula, repeats often: “Just when you
think you’ve got it figured out, you don’t.”
No wonder the mantra that kept running
through my head on K2 in 1992 was
“Remember ‘86!”
In the summer of 1987, not one climber
reached the top of K2. But a Japanese-
Pakistani expedition pushing up the Abruzzi
Ridge came upon Mrufka’s body between
Camps II and III. She was frozen in place
on a steep slope, her Sticht plate still
clipped to a fixed rope, which was also
wrapped around her wrist. In a remarkable
operation, the team carried her body down
to the foot of the Abruzzi Ridge and buried
her there.
That summer, several Japanese and
several Spaniards reached the Shoulder
and climbed into the Bottleneck couloir
before being turned back by bad weather.
They found no trace of Alfred Imitzer,
Hannes Wieser, Julie Tullis, or Alan Rouse.
The two Austrians may have been
avalanched off the ridge between August
1986 and July 1987. Tullis and Rouse were
most likely entombed by the winter snows.
As is true for so many victims of K2, the
bodies of those four climbers have never
been found.
Epilogue: The Holy
Grail
Despite the title of Jim Curran’s book about
the 1986 season, in the story of K2, there’s
more tragedy than triumph. The first
ascents of other 8,000ers unfurled as
glorious sagas of perseverance and
daring—the French dashing up Annapurna
in 1950 after wasting a month simply trying
to find the mountain, Hermann Buhl going
solo in 1953 to the top of Nanga Parbat,
Hillary and Tenzing blithely solving the last
obstacles on Everest the same year, Joe
Brown and George Band stopping twenty
feet short of the top of Kangchenjunga in
1955 out of respect for the beliefs of the
people of Sikkim, for whom the mountain
was a god and a protector. (Our team did
the same on Kangchenjunga in 1989.)
But the first ascent of K2, in 1954, will
forever be clouded by the bitter and
interminable controversy it spawned. If you
believe Walter Bonatti’s version of the
events of July 30 and 31—and by now,
most people in the climbing world do
accept that version—the dominant
character in the summit duo, Achille
Compagnoni, must go down in history as
one of the indelible bad guys of
mountaineering. For fear of sharing the
triumph with the younger, better climber,
Compagnoni was apparently willing to let
Bonatti and Amir Mahdi freeze to death in
an open bivouac. And the premeditated
ruse Compagnoni devised to prevent that
sharing—hiding Camp IX behind rocks
above a dangerous traverse—turned the
bravest Hunza climber of his day into a
frostbite victim who would never be able to
go back to the high mountains.
The heroes of K2—for me, the list is
headed by Bonatti, Fritz Wiessner, and the
whole 1953 American team—remain men
lastingly scarred by defeat and, in the
cases of Bonatti and Wiessner, by betrayal.
Toward the end of Curran’s book, he tries
to enumerate the triumphs of the 1986
season: Wanda Rutkiewicz becoming the
first woman to climb K2, Benoit Chamoux’s
dazzling twenty-three-hour ascent, the
Poles claiming the Magic Line after it had
turned back others—but those deeds are
so far overshadowed by the thirteen deaths
that 1986 will forever figure as a black
season in the annals of mountaineering in
the Karakoram.
Ever since Bob Bates and Charlie Houston
wrote their classic narrative of the 1953
campaign, “the savage mountain” has
become the sobriquet that has stuck to K2.
John Barry and Jim Curran (in his historical
survey) incorporated that label in the titles
of their own K2 books. Last summer, the
nickname recurrently appeared in the
media accounts of the 2008 disaster.
It doesn’t work for me, though. K2 is not
some malevolent being, lurking there above
the Baltoro, waiting to get us. It’s just there.
It’s indifferent. It’s an inanimate mountain
made of rock, ice, and snow. The
“savageness” is what we project onto it, as
if we blame the peak for our own
misadventures on it.
There’s no denying how dangerous a
mountain K2 is, however. According to the
website EverestNews.com, in 2008 alone
at least 290 climbers reached the top of
Mount Everest, while only 1 person died on
the mountain. No fewer than 77 men and
women topped out on a single day in late
May. On K2 that summer, 18 climbers
reached the summit, while 11 died trying.
According to the most accurate count, by
May 2009, 299 people have stood on top of
K2, while 77 have died on its flanks. That’s
a pretty daunting ratio—it means that for
every 4 climbers who reach the summit, at
least 1 dies. (The ratio for Everest is
roughly 19 to 1.)
Those cold statistics mask a discrepancy
that only further underscores the danger of
K2. Every spring and fall, Everest now
swarms with relative novices, the clients on
guided expeditions who make up the bulk
of the traffic. It’s not surprising that some of
them should come to grief. K2, however, is
still almost exclusively the province of
experienced mountaineers, men and
women who are used to extricating
themselves from the most perilous
predicaments.
It’s also true, though, that on Everest
experienced “professional” climbers make
mistakes and get in trouble. In the public
eye, all clients get scapegoated as
dilettantes who have no business being on
the mountain. But many clients, including
ones I’ve guided, have been training as
amateur climbers for years before they sign
up for Everest. In 1996, the clients got most
of the blame for the tragedy. Shouldn’t the
leaders have absorbed much of the
criticism for mistakes that led to the
disaster?
In 2004, the French climbing writer Charlie
Buffet wrote a deft little book called La Folie
du K2 (K2 Madness). In it, he listed the ten
French mountaineers who had reached the
top of K2 to that date: eric Escoffier, Daniel
Lacroix, Benoit Chamoux, Maurice and
Liliane Barrard, Michel Parmentier, Pierre
Beghin, Christophe Profit, Chantal Mauduit,
and Jean-Christophe Lafaille. That list
reads like a Who’s Who of French
mountaineering. Laconically, Buffet
commented, “At this time, only two of them
are still alive, Profit and Lafaille. All the rest
died in the mountains.”
Since my great friend J.-C. Lafaille
disappeared on Makalu in 2006, that
reduces Buffet’s list of the living to one:
Christophe Profit, who with Beghin made
the first ascent of K2’s northwest ridge in
1991. And with the death of the Frenchman
Hugues d’Aubarede in August 2008,
Buffet’s roster becomes even more doleful.
Buffet closes his book with a powerful
quotation from Lafaille. Since I don’t read
French, I’d been unaware of J.-C.’s
comments until this year, when a friend
translated the passage for me. (In the book,
it’s not clear whether J.-C., who got to the
top of K2 in 2001, wrote the passage for a
climbing magazine or simply spoke it during
an interview with Buffet.)
It’s a superb, immense mountain that
crushes you. Here the risks are palpable,
you can see them. Not far from base camp,
there’s this memorial [the Gilkey-Puchoz
memorial]. You feel as though you’re in a
cemetery. To reach the foot of the [Abruzzi]
face, you walk along the Godwin Austen
Glacier, where a Spanish friend of mine
found the body of Maurice Barrard two
years ago. It’s only a fifteen-minute walk
from the tents where we lived for two
months. And every time that I took that
path, I found human debris there—clothes,
shoes, a pelvis. The whole history of this
mountain lies heavy on your shoulders.
K2 was the greatest adventure of my
climbing life. It was the ultimate test of my
mountaineering skills. It had everything:
close calls, interminable waits during
storms, retreats to base camp, desperate
rescues of other climbers. I not only
needed all my ability to get up the
mountain, I needed all my patience.
(Sometimes I call K2 the “full meal deal” of
mountaineering—everything you could ask
for in a climb, and more.) In all of my
expeditions to 8,000ers, I’ve never spent so
long on a peak before getting to the top. K2
was a lifetime of expeditions packed into
one summer.
It was also one of the two or three most
important turning points in my life. As I
hiked out the Baltoro that August, I could
finally say to myself, I really do have the
skills to get up the 8,000ers. I’ve climbed
the three highest. What about the others?
Ultimately, K2 gave me the push and the
confidence to conceive of my Endeavor
8000.
By 2008, I’d been on ten expeditions to
Mount Everest. I’d reached its summit six
times. Ever since 2005, when I finished the
cycle of the fourteen 8,000ers by climbing
Annapurna, I’d always entertained the
thought that, given the right circumstances,
I might give Everest another go.
Then, just last spring, the right
circumstances fell into place. On March 25,
2009, I set out once more for the world’s
highest mountain, trekking up the Khumbu
Valley for the seventh time on the way to
base camp on the south side. Three
months shy of my fiftieth birthday, I still felt
as physically fit as I ever had.
The expedition was organized by the Eddie
Bauer company. By now, I’m part of a team
helping design a new line of technical gear,
called First Ascent. Showcasing the
products on Everest was to be the final
stage of the company’s official launch of
that line of products.
It was an honor for me to be part of the
Eddie Bauer campaign. The primary draw
for me in returning to Everest, however,
was the challenge of trying to climb to
29,035 feet again. People often ask when
I’m going to quit climbing. My response is
“I’ll quit when I no longer enjoy it, or can’t
do it anymore.”
Everest was as crowded as ever last
spring. My biggest problem on the
mountain, besides the usual spells of bad
weather, was the traffic congestion up high
on the South Col route. But I bided my time
through late April and early May, and finally
the weather forecast seemed favorable for
a summit push. It’s always a bit of a gamble
to leave base camp, with high camp still
three days away, and to time it just right for
a summit attempt. We had originally hoped
to go for the top on May 17, thereby
beating the crowds. But May 17 was a bust,
with extremely high winds and near-zero
visibility. So we waited in our tents on the
South Col all day and night. And as we
waited, many other climbers arrived. We
knew the traffic would be heavy the next
day.
Finally, at 11:00 P.M. on May 18, four
teammates and I left the South Col. It was
not only pretty crowded on the route, but it
was quite cold—somebody said minus 30
degrees Fahrenheit. Even so, we made
good time, reaching the Balcony at 3:00
A.M., the summit at 8:00 A.M.
By the time the sun rose, it was a nice day,
slightly breezy but warm enough and
gloriously clear. The descent was
uneventful, and we got back to the South
Col at 1:00 P.M. As I wrote on my website,
“So, 14-hour round trip. My seventh ascent
of the mountain and more than likely my
last ascent of the mountain. It was a great
place to revisit, to come back to Everest,
but I don’t have the desire anymore to
come back and climb the mountain for the
eighth time.”
On Everest in spring 2009, I made a choice
I’d never resorted to before, which was to
use supplemental oxygen even though I
had no client to guide. I explained the
decision on my website: “Knowing that the
next day would be rather cold and windy,
as a safety issue I felt it would be better to
stay with the team and use supplemental
oxygen. So it was more based on safety,
and sticking with my group. So I kind of
compromised my ascent but it still worked
out well.” It was gratifying later to learn that
the people following our expedition online
uniformly praised my decision, rather than
needling me about compromising my purist
style.
Climbing Everest again seemed
reasonable. But there’s no way I’d ever try
K2 again. Objectively, it’s not that severe a
climb, at least on the Abruzzi Ridge. It’s
gnarly, and it’s not easy to descend in bad
conditions. It’s colder than Everest,
because it’s situated a full eight degrees of
latitude farther north, the equivalent of the
distance between Charleston, South
Carolina, and New York City. On Everest,
every spring you can usually count on a
stable window of clear weather, when the
high jet-stream winds start to get pushed
away by the approaching monsoon. But the
monsoon doesn’t reach the Karakoram.
Instead, you have to throw the dice with the
weather. There’s no guarantee that you’ll
get a single prolonged spell of good days
all summer.
During the climbing campaigns of 1987,
1988, and 1989, no fewer than fifty-three
climbers reached the summit of Mount
Everest. In that same three-year period,
although fifteen different expeditions,
including some of the best mountaineers in
the world, attacked K2, not a single person
got to the summit. I’m not surprised.
Many climbers have made repeat ascents
of Everest, including me with my seven.
The record holder, Apa Sherpa, upped his
own total of Everest summits to nineteen in
2009. But as of May 2009, only three
climbers have gotten to the top of K2 more
than once, each of them making only a
second ascent.
The ultimate barrier on K2, I think, is
psychological. If you’ve been fortunate
enough to hold the holy grail of
mountaineering briefly in your hands, you
don’t want to get greedy and try to take it
home with you. If you do, as with Sir
Gawain and Sir Lancelot in the Arthurian
legend, only bad things will happen.
In recent years, there’s been gloomy talk
about whether K2 will soon be “trivialized”
the way Everest has been. The South Col
route on Everest is now usually strung
every spring with fixed ropes, in a
continuous chain from advance base camp
to the summit. That hasn’t happened yet on
the Abruzzi Ridge on K2, but there’s no
saying it couldn’t sometime soon. The
expectations of last year’s climbers that the
Bottleneck and the traverse at the top of it
had to be strung with fixed ropes indicates
a huge mental shift from the 1990s.
A few paying clients have gone on K2
expeditions in recent years. As far as I
know, none has gotten to the summit. But
the gloomy observers predict a future in
which guide services will charge affluent
wannabes big bucks to be hauled up the
Abruzzi. If those outfits hire Sherpa or
Hunzas to fix the ropes and pitch the
camps, and if they routinely use
supplemental oxygen, then K2 will move
toward the situation Everest is now in.
Fixed ropes are the linchpin for commercial
guiding, for if a client only has to slide his
jumar up one rope after another, rather
than actually climb the rock and ice, a
formidable challenge is reduced to a
treadmill test of stamina. It’s inevitable, I
think, that companies will try to
commercialize K2, especially now that it’s
becoming a “sexier” prize than Everest.
And that will be a sad day for
mountaineering.
Another recent trend on Everest is the
bagging of “firsts” that range from the
monumental to the absurd. For the critics,
this is one more measure of the mountain’s
trivialization. The first winter ascent, the
first descent by ski and by snowboard,
even the first descent by parapente
represented truly skillful and extreme
deeds. But within the last ten years,
Everest has been climbed by a blind man,
by a double amputee, by a seventy-oneyear-
old man, and by a fifteen-year-old
Sherpa. The speed record for Everest
keeps getting ratcheted downward.
It frightens me when I hear from people
who say they want to be the first this or the
first that on Everest; often they ask for my
endorsement. Those are not good reasons
to climb the mountain, so I always decline.
These folks obviously hope to garner
attention, rather than just to be on the
mountain for the joy of the experience.
Climbing the mountain for its own sake
should be reason enough to go there.
Still, the firsts continue to proliferate. It’s
gotten so that Everest expeditions in
search of sponsors will cook up “firsts” so
arcane that any experienced climber would
laugh at them—except that they seem to be
effective fund-raising gimmicks. Such
developments may be in the cards for K2,
but I wonder. Skiing down the mountain, for
instance, strikes me as extremely difficult
and scary but conceivable. Who knows
what the next generation will pull off?
Indeed, in 2001, the great Tyrolean climber
Hans Kammerlander planned to ski down
the Abruzzi after a solo ascent. But after
teaming up with J.-C. Lafaille to struggle up
the route in hideous conditions, he changed
his mind about strapping on his skis for the
descent.
In 1980, a Polish expedition accomplished
the first winter ascent of Everest, as
Krzysztof Wielicki and Leszek Cichy
reached the top by the South Col route on
February 17. This was a genuine landmark,
one of the great feats in Everest history. So
far, there have been two attempts on K2 in
winter, both by Polish teams, in 1987 and
2003. The second effort, led by Wielicki,
fought to an altitude of 25,000 feet on the
Abruzzi Ridge before throwing in the towel.
I suspect that this tantalizing “first” will be
accomplished by someone in the next five
to ten years.
I climbed Gasherbrum I with Wielicki in
1995, after my partner Rob Hall had gone
home. It was simply by chance that Wielicki
and I met on the mountain, but as a partner
he was a man you could trust and rely on.
He loved being in the mountains, and he
was like a tiger on the hill. I can only
imagine how strong he was in the 1980s,
when he was at the top of his game. I
would gladly go on another expedition with
Krzysztof if the opportunity arose.
I believe it will be the Poles, with their
legendary stamina, tolerance for pain, and
tenacity, who will be the first to get up K2 in
winter. They seem willing to go back time
and time again until they succeed. But even
so, a future triumph will depend on
phenomenally good conditions during the
winter the climbers mount their attack.
On Everest, every plausible route—except
the Fantasy Ridge, a line on the east face
to the right of the two routes that have
already been climbed—has been knocked
off. On K2, there are still a number of highquality
routes awaiting their first ascents,
including the east face and the complete
northwest ridge. And the passion to put up
first solo ascents of difficult routes is alive
and well on the world’s second-highest
mountain.
In recent years, helicopter rescue
has—thanks to some astonishingly gutsy
aerial feats by Nepalese and Pakistani
pilots—begun to transform the game all
over the Himalaya. There is already
evidence that some self-styled heroalpinists
are willing to stick their necks out
on 8,000ers farther than they otherwise
would, as they count on choppers to get
them out of trouble. This is, on the whole, a
deplorable trend, for the pilots, who
routinely go nameless in the media, risk
their own lives to save showboating
climbers who are only after personal glory.
If you doubt whether aerial rescue can
transform an exploratory “game,” just look
at the north and south poles. For centuries,
the poles were the most remote places on
earth, and such genuine heroes as
Amundsen, Scott, and Peary gave
everything they had to reach them by the
best means available—sleds, dogs, and
skis. Nowadays you can book a trip to
skydive over the north pole or be flown
there to compete in a marathon. Ninety
degrees north can be “bagged” in merely a
long weekend away from your home in
suburban America. There are still daring
explorers pushing new “firsts” in the Arctic
and the Antarctic, although when they get
in trouble, they are routinely spirited to
safety by helicopters.
Will choppers transform climbing on K2, or
is altitude an impenetrable barrier for
aircraft? It remains to be seen. No climber
has yet been lifted by helicopter from the
summit of Everest, but a few years ago a
nervy French pilot touched down there; with
his rotors still going and only one skid
balanced on the summit, he stayed for
several minutes before peeling off into the
empyrean. No one could have safely
jumped aboard and been whisked to safety,
as the helicopter was already at its limit.
But who knows what the next few years
may bring.
For me, it would be a sad turn of events if
helicopters could pluck stranded climbers
off the highest summits. In the last decade,
cell phones have transformed the rescue of
backcountry hikers and climbers in the
United States. A lot of folks go out now
believing that if they get into trouble, all
they have to do is dial 911. God forbid if the
same thing came to pass on the 8,000ers.
I’ve always liked the sense of disconnection
from the rest of the world that I get on high
peaks, and the self-reliance that imposes,
as I realize that my safety depends entirely
on my own careful decision making. There
aren’t many places left on earth where a
rescue by outsiders is still literally
impossible.
It’s clear that in recent times, climbers on
8,000ers, like some of the ones stranded in
August 2008 above the Bottleneck, have
simply sat down to await a rescue from
other climbers. Such a thing was always
inconceivable to me. On all my expeditions,
I said to myself, If I get in trouble here, it’s
my problem to get myself out. In a way, I
kind of liked that mandate. It made me test
myself. It taught me self-confidence. And in
the end, it made me a more conservative
climber.
I’ll never forget peering over the ridge crest
on the summit slope on Dhaulagiri in 1999,
and suddenly seeing a dead man sprawled
in the snow. That was another wake-up
call. As I fought down the shiver that
crawled up my spine, I vowed, “Ed, if you
fuck up, that’ll be you lying there.”
For several years after 1998, there was a
macabre mystique about women and K2.
By that date, only five women had reached
the summit: Wanda Rutkiewicz, Liliane
Barrard, Julie Tullis, Chantal Mauduit, and
Alison Hargreaves. And by 1998, all five
were dead. Barrard and Tullis died
descending the Abruzzi in 1986, as did
Hargreaves in 1995, when she was
apparently blown off the mountain by a
tremendous gust of wind. (Hargreaves’s
death caused a huge and to my mind
ridiculous furor in her native Great Britain,
where she was posthumously
censured—by the popular press, not the
climbing community—for leaving two small
children motherless. Any number of male
climbers over the decades, including
Mallory, have done the same, without being
tarred and feathered as irresponsible
fathers.) Then Rutkiewicz died on
Kangchenjunga in 1992, and Mauduit on
Dhaulagiri in 1998.
The fact that no woman alive had climbed
K2 sparked a competition among a small
sorority of ambitious female alpinists.
Jennifer Jordan wrote a popular book
called (here we go again!) Savage Summit
, chronicling the life stories of the five who
had climbed K2 and died. And in 2002, her
husband, Jeff Rhoads, organized an
expedition to the mountain, while Jordan
made a film, called Women of K2, that
pivoted around Araceli Segarra’s attempt to
become the sixth woman to get up the
mountain, thereby breaking what was
already being called “the curse of the
women of K2.”
Araceli was one of the on-camera stars of
David Breashears’s IMAX film about
Everest in 1996. She’s a strong climber and
a great teammate, and she also happens to
be beautiful enough to make a living as a
model in her native Spain. Her effort on the
Cesen route, however, was turned back by
weather and snow conditions at only
23,300 feet. It was on this expedition that
Jordan and Rhoads discovered the remains
of Dudley Wolfe on the Godwin Austen
Glacier.
Despite Araceli’s failure to climb K2, the
film won several awards. It also provoked
an odd backlash among feminists, who
thought that what Jordan was saying was
that women simply aren’t good enough to
climb K2 safely. She was dumbfounded,
since her real point was to dramatize just
how dangerous a mountain K2 is, for men
as well as for women.
The so-called curse produced a far more
opportunistic response than Jordan’s film,
when a publicity-hungry American climber
named Heidi Howkins published a book
called K2: One Woman’s Quest for the
Summit, about how she planned to climb
K2. Give me a break! Do the climb first,
then write the book! Howkins never did get
very high on the mountain, but that didn’t
prevent National Geographic Explorer from
making a film about her self-styled “quest.”
It was titled (wouldn’t you know it?)
Savage Summits.
As of May 2009, no American woman has
yet climbed K2. This is a first that will
undoubtedly keep a heated rivalry alive
until some female mountaineer from this
country pulls off the feat.
Meanwhile, in 2004, a Spanish woman,
Edurne Pasaban, quietly ended the curse,
as she reached the summit by the Abruzzi
Ridge as part of an Italian-Spanish team. At
the moment, she stands tied with the
Austrian climber Gerlinde Kaltenbrunner,
both of whom have climbed twelve of the
fourteen 8,000ers. Back in the 1980s, a lot
of people thought that Wanda Rutkiewicz
would be the first woman to join the elite
company of men who had completed all
fourteen. She was way ahead of any other
woman in the world, in terms of 8,000ers
on her resume. But seventeen years after
Rutkiewicz’s death, no woman has yet
completed the list.
Because they are Europeans, and because
they don’t have the kinds of publicity
machines up and running that Heidi
Howkins (or for that matter, Reinhold
Messner) deployed, this friendly
competition—and both women insist it is
friendly—has flown under the radar in the
United States. But I think it’s an interesting
and admirable challenge, and I’m following
it pretty closely. I’d be the first to
congratulate Pasaban or Kaltenbrunner the
minute either woman joins our little club, of
which at last count there are still only
sixteen members.
In a postscript I wrote for the paperback
edition of No Shortcuts to the Top, I
admitted that after my eighteen-year-long
campaign to climb all fourteen 8,000ers
had come to a close, there were times
when I felt at loose ends. Appearances on
shows such as The Colbert Report and
The Daily Show with Jon Stewart were fun
and gratifying, as were the numerous
letters and e-mails I got from readers, and
the enthusiastic receptions that often
greeted my slide shows and “inspirational”
talks. But I didn’t really envision my future
as that of an after-dinner speaker, living off
an endless recounting of the climbs I’d
done in my prime. I enjoy those speaking
events, but I still need to push myself
physically and mentally in the outdoors.
The future would seem empty to me if I had
no more mountains to climb.
Since May 2005, when I returned from
Annapurna, I’ve also found other kinds of
adventures to keep my juices flowing. One
was running the New York City Marathon
with Paula in November 2006. As much fun
as the run itself (notwithstanding all the
sore muscles we strained on that twentysix-
mile course) were the weeks of training
together near our home on Bainbridge
Island. Paula and I were able to share a
workout regimen with a common goal in a
more satisfying way than we could ever
share 8,000-meter expeditions.
My dogsled trip with Will Steger on Baffin
Island in the spring of 2007 was another
novel form of adventure for me. I had to
learn a whole new art of traveling, and I
was fascinated by the culture of the Inuit
villages we visited, so different from the
cultures of Skardu and Askole or
Dingboche and Namche Bazar. Yet as
grueling as that overland journey was at its
toughest, it didn’t test me to the limits as
the 8,000ers—especialy Annapurna and
K2—had.
A year later, I returned to Baffin Island with
my dog-mushing friend John Stetson. This
time, rather than using dogs to haul our
gear, we pulled our own sleds, which
weighed 220 pounds each, almost 150
miles over the barren, frozen landscape in
a long loop out of the small town of Pond
Inlet. This was a physically more
demanding trip than the one with Steger,
and for me a more rewarding one.
In January 2009, I climbed Aconcagua, at
22,841 feet the highest peak in South
America, as part of a gear-testing
expedition organized by the Eddie Bauer
company—a trial run, in effect, for the
launching of the First Ascent line that we
would undertake on Everest in the spring.
Aconcagua’s not as hard a mountain as an
8,000er, but it can be deceptively lethal:
many climbers die on its slopes from
altitude sickness, pulmonary or cerebral
edema, hypothermia, or getting lost in a
storm. Several folks died, in fact, while we
were on the mountain.
I’d first climbed Aconcagua twenty years
earlier, when I was twenty-nine and in
prime shape. I expected to find it a little
harder at the age of forty-nine, but I
surprised myself. On the summit, I thought,
Hell, I feel great, I want to go farther. And
also: Hey, this is still what excites me!
The pleasure I had on Aconcagua was
what motivated me to go to Everest with
the Eddie Bauer First Ascent team last
spring. I’m sure that skeptics may have
said, “What’s in it for Viesturs to go back to
Everest for the eleventh time? A lucrative
deal with his sponsors, more publicity via
online dispatches?” But the number one
reason for me to go to Everest in 2009 was
the simple fact that I still find high
mountains intriguing. I’ll always love the
mountain environment. And as I learned on
Aconcagua, climbing is still fun.
Skeptics might also say, “Hey, he’s scared
of turning fifty. He still thinks he’s got
something to prove.” But the fact is, I’m not
afraid of the big five-oh. I still feel really
active, strong, and intelligent. If I didn’t
know my own birth date, I’d guess that I’m
only thirty-five. Maybe forty, tops. Calendar
age had nothing to do with that eleventh
attempt on Everest.
When I was closing in on the end of
Endeavor 8000, some of Paula’s friends
would say to her, “How can you stand it
that Ed’s away so much? Don’t you worry
about him? And don’t the kids miss him?”
It’s true, I was gone for long stretches, and
mountaineering is inevitably dangerous.
But I liked to point out that when I was
home, I was really there for Paula and the
kids. I even told the kids that I probably
spent more time with them each year than
a dad who went off to his dreary nine-tofive
job every day.
Ever since Paula and I got married, in
February 1996, and especially after Gil,
Ella, and Anabel were born, family has
been the most important thing in my life,
even more important than big mountains
and climbing friendships. And since the
summer of 2005, when I got home from
Annapurna, I’ve been a true full-time dad.
In the last year, we’ve divided our time
between Bainbridge Island and Sun Valley,
Idaho, where we’ve owned a condo since
2006. During the winter of 2008–09, the
kids went to public school in Sun Valley,
but we returned to Bainbridge for the
summer. Time will tell how we’ll manage
our dual residences in future years, but it’s
nice to have options.
This year, the kids really missed their
friends back home, but they love the
recreational possibilities of Sun Valley. Gil
and Ella have become demon skiers. I’m a
pretty good skier myself, but when those
two bomb straight down the slope, it’s all I
can do to keep up with them.
At age eleven, Gil is the extrovert of the
family. He loves conversation, and he just
talks and talks. Paula and I tell him he has
a future as a talk-show host. Both friends
his age and adults think he’s hilarious. And
he’s still madly into Seattle Seahawks
football, even though, after the team went
to the Super Bowl in 2006, their last three
seasons have been pretty disappointing.
If Gil’s the extrovert, Ella, who just turned
nine this June, is our introvert. She’s strong
and stoic, never complains about a minor
accident or some chore she has to do. Like
me, she’s quiet in company, tending to
recede when others dominate the
conversation. She’s a great athlete, able to
keep up with Gil on the ski slopes. She’s
also taken up indoor sport climbing
whenever she gets the chance. If one of
our three kids becomes a mountaineer, it’ll
probably be Ella.
Anabel, at four, is the little lover in the
family. Without any particular pretext, she’ll
come over to Paula or me and give us a
kiss. Or she’ll crawl into my lap and say, “I
love you, Dad.” But she’s not clingy—she’s
a solid, independent gal in her own right.
As for Paula, she’s turned out to be a
wonderful companion and the great mom I
always knew she would be. She has a
God-given talent for motherhood. And she
doesn’t do it by spoiling the kids, or by
using baby talk with them. I’m pleased to
say that I’ve never heard any scuttlebutt
from friends in Seattle or Sun Valley about
our children being pampered or
overindulged. Paula is, quite simply, the
cornerstone of our family.
Before I decided to go to Everest again,
Paula and I had some good long talks
about it. We deliberated, in fact, longer than
we had before any other expedition I’ve
ever considered. Of course she worries
about me every time I try an 8,000er. But
Paula has always fully supported me, and
the mental strength she sends my way
while I’m climbing is, I’m convinced, part of
why I’ve been successful. Without her
support, I would never go on another
expedition.
Paula has always insisted, “Don’t call me
from the summit. Call me when you get
back to camp.” She knows from experience
that standing on the summit doesn’t mean
that you’ve climbed the mountain.
In the spring of 2009, she knew I’d be gone
for eight or nine weeks. She knew firsthand
that Everest is dangerous—particularly the
Khumbu Icefall, which you have to climb
through several times on every ascent of
the South Col route. But by now she trusts
me on the mountain. She knows that I
know how to be safe. Since I wasn’t going
to be bound to anyone else’s schedule, I
could go through the icefall as fast as I
needed to. That’s one place where speed
equals safety.
It was, I have to admit, a bit hard telling the
kids that I’d be gone for all of April and
May. But they’re troupers. When I told Gil,
he got a slightly stricken look on his face;
then he said, “Oh, yeah, Dad, I’ll be okay.”
But I knew already that I was going to miss
the three of them as I never had before.
It’s been seventeen years since I climbed
K2, but in a sense, that great mountain has
never been far from my thoughts. And
writing this book has plunged me back into
the fascination with K2 that had me in its
grips when I read everything I could as
homework for our 1992 expedition.
No mountain in the world has a more
interesting history. And even though the
cynics feel that the second-highest
mountain is about to be tarnished by the
kinds of commercialization that have
tainted Everest, I’m optimistic about the
future of K2. In 2009, the mountain remains
an ultimate test of the ambitions of the best
climbers in the world. The gold that gilds
the holy grail is still intact.
One way I know this to be true comes from
having sat in on the chat of high-altitude
climbers all around the world. In their
company, if you mention climbing Everest,
the remark may elicit nothing more than a
shrug. But if you let on that you’ve reached
the top of K2, a hush comes over the room.
And then, invariably, someone will say,
“Tell us about it.”
Acknowledgments
In 1992, when I went to Pakistan to attempt
K2, I traveled there with friend and partner
Scott Fischer. Young, ambitious, filled with
energy and enthusiasm, we committed
ourselves to giving all we had to climbing
this test piece among mountains. We had
nothing to lose, everything to gain, and no
limit of time. In the throes of our campaign
to climb the second highest peak in the
world we teamed up with climbers who also
aspired to do what we were doing. The
climbers I connected with, related to, and
enjoyed climbing with became lifelong
friends, who still bring back the fondest
memories of that difficult yet successful
season. The friends and partners whom I
wish to thank specifically are Charley
Mace, Neal Beidleman, the late Scott
Fischer, Rob Hall, and Gary Ball. I enjoyed
their companionship immensely and had
the pleasure of climbing as partners with
them on K2 and elsewhere. There were
others on the mountain that season, and
they all contributed in some way. I
acknowledge them as well.
I would also like to thank those who forged
the way on K2, specifically the 1953
American Expedition. Those men displayed
to me the indelible example of team work,
camaraderie, trust, and commitment in
expedition climbing. When someone
mentions “the brotherhood of the rope,” that
band of mountaineers instantly comes to
mind.
One member of that expedition I wish to
thank specially and with my utmost
gratitude and respect is Dee Molenaar.
After my ascent of K2, Dee presented me
with a bound and illustrated copy of his
private expedition journal. For this book, he
allowed me to quote passages from the
journal that I thought were important in
highlighting details of the 1953 expedition.
K2 in 1992 came quite early in my career,
when I still had very little in the way of
support or sponsors. But to everyone who
supported our K2 climb, I say thank you.
Thanks also to family and friends who gave
me emotional support and waited for word
to trickle out from the Baltoro about our
expedition. Those were the “good old days”
when we often got home before anyone
received word as to how things had gone
on an expedition. We literally walked off the
map and then a few months later, walked
back on.
There are certain events in one’s life that
are cornerstones. My climb of K2 was one
such event. I believe that one becomes a
better, more rounded climber, and also a
more thoughtful and patient human being,
after having successfully climbed and
descended K2. There is no comparison. K2
is the ultimate test of climbing ability,
judgment, and patience at extreme
altitudes. The bonds that form during the
hardships we undergo on such climbs
stand the test of time, even while they are
difficult, if not impossible, to explain.
—Ed Viesturs
My strongest link to the fascinating history
of K2 lies in long-term friendships with
some of its principal characters—especially
Charlie Houston, Bob Bates, Bob Craig,
and Fritz Wiessner. The privilege of
listening to them tell their stories has been
one of the joys of my life as a mountaineer.
In addition, I was delighted by more
sporadic friendships with K2 veterans Dee
Molenaar, Paul Petzoldt, and Jim Curran,
and as a journalist, I had the rare
experience of meeting and getting to know
Walter Bonatti and his teammate Lino
Lacedelli.
Many people helped Ed Viesturs and me
gain access to important photographs, for
the use of which they gave unstinting
permission. They include Polly Wiessner,
Charlie Houston, Greg Glade, Ed Webster,
Charley Mace, and Chris Klinke. Ed and I
hired freelance researcher Alice Gifford to
hunt down the availability of and rights to
the historical photos. She accomplished
this difficult task superbly.
Dee Molenaar not only let us quote from his
K2 diary, but also he helped us adapt his
own incomparable maps and diagrams for
this book. Many thanks to Dee for his
involvement and aid.
Our editor at Broadway Books, Stacy
Creamer, not only got this project off the
ground, but also championed it through a
series of frantic deadlines and logistical
mine fields. Upon her abrupt departure last
spring to another publishing house, Charlie
Conrad stepped in and smoothly guided the
book toward its finish line. Throughout the
whole process, assistant editor Laura
Swerdloff performed many valuable tasks.
Once again, Ed and I are deeply indebted
to our masterly agent, Stuart Krichevsky,
who not only “closed the deal” but offered
his constant advice about matters as minor
yet consequential as finding a subtitle and
getting the cover photo right. Stuart’s
colleague Shana Cohen and his assistant
Kathryne Wick came through (as usual)
with all kinds of important chores and
details.
The American Alpine Club library in
Golden, Colorado, proved an invaluable
research resource. And I am grateful to my
longtime climbing buddy Ed Ward, and to
my wife, Sharon Roberts, for reading the
book in manuscript and offering pithy
comments and vivid reactions.
—David Roberts
Bibliography
Barry, John. K2: Savage Mountain, Savage
Summer. Sparkford, U.K., 1987.
Bonatti, Walter. Le Mie Montagne. Bologna,
1961.
____________ The Mountains of My Life.
New York, 2001.
____________ On the Heights. London,
1964.
Bowley, Graham, and Andrea Kannapell.
“Chaos on the ‘Mountain That Invites
Death.’” New York Times, August 6, 2008.
Buffet, Charlie. La Folie du K2. Chamonix,
France, 2004.
Carter, H. Adams. “The August
Catastrophe on K2.” American Alpine
Journal: 1987. New York, 1987.
Child, Greg. “A Margin of Luck.” Mixed
Emotions. Seattle, 1993.
____________ “Another Tragedy on K2.”
Postcards from the Edge. Seattle, 1998.
____________ “The Dangerous Summer.”
Mixed Emotions. Seattle, 1993.
____________ “Death and Faxes.”
Postcards from the Edge. Seattle, 1998.
Cranmer, Chappel, and Fritz Wiessner.
“The Second American Expedition to K2.”
The American Alpine Journal: 1940. New
York, 1940.
Crowley, Aleister. The Confessions of
Aleister Crowley. 1929. Reprint. New York,
1969.
Curran, Jim. K2: The Story of the Savage
Mountain. London, 1995. K2: Triumph and
Tragedy. London, 1987.
Desio, Ardito. Ascent of K2: Second
Highest Peak in the World. London, 1955.
____________ “The Italian 1954
Expedition to the Karakoram,” The
Mountain World: 1955. New York, 1955.
Diemberger, Kurt. The Endless Knot.
Seattle, 1990.
Filippi, Fillipo de. Karakoram and the
Western Himalaya. London, 1912.
Hornbein, Thomas F. Everest: The West
Ridge. San Francisco, 1966.
Houston, Charles S. “Death in High
Places.” The American Alpine Journal:
1987. New York, 1987.
Houston, Charles S., and Robert H. Bates.
K2: The Savage Mountain. New York,
1954.
Houston, Charles S., Robert H. Bates, et al.
Five Miles High. New York, 1939.
Jordan, Jennifer. Savage Summit: The
True Stories of the First Five Women Who
Climbed K2. New York, 2005.
Kauffman, Andrew J., and William L.
Putnam. K2: The 1939 Tragedy. Seattle,
1992.
Kodas, Michael. “A Few False Moves,”
Outside, November 2008.
Kukuczka, Jerzy. “K2’s South Face,” The
American Alpine Journal: 1987. New York,
1987.
Lacedelli, Lino, and Giovanni Cenacchi.
K2: The Price of Conquest. Hildersley,
U.K., 2006.
Maraini, Fosco. Karakoram: The Ascent of
Gasherbrum IV. New York, 1959.
McDonald, Bernadette. Brotherhood of the
Rope: The Biography of Charles Houston.
Seattle, 2007.
Messner, Reinhold, and A. Gogna. K2:
Mountain of Mountains. London, 1981.
Molenaar, Dee. “K2 Diary 1953.”
(Unpublished.)
Petzoldt, Patricia. On Top of the World: My
Adventures with My Mountain-Climbing
Husband. New York, 1953.
Power, Matthew. “The Killing Peak.” Men’s
Journal, November 2008.
Ridgeway, Rick. The Last Step: The
American Ascent of K2. Seattle, 1980.
Ringholz, Raye. On Belay! The Life of
Legendary Mountaineer Paul Petzoldt.
Seattle, 1997.
Roberts, David. “Five Who Made It to the
Top.” Moments of Doubt. Seattle, 1986.
__________ “Is K2 the New Everest?”
National Geographic Adventure, October
2008.
__________ “K2 at 50: The Bitter Legacy.”
National Geographic Adventure,
September 2004.
__________ “The K2 Mystery.” Moments of
Doubt. Seattle, 1986.
Rose, David, and Ed Douglas. Regions of
the Heart: The Triumph and Tragedy of
Alison Hargreaves. Washington, D. C.,
2000.
Rowell, Galen. In the Throne Room of the
Mountain Gods. San Francisco, 1977.
Rutkiewicz, Wanda. “The First Woman’s
Ascent of K2.” In K2: Triumph and Tragedy
, by Jim Curran. London, 1995.
Schoening, Pete. K2 1953. (Privately
published, 2004.)
Tenderini, Mirella, and Michael Shandrick.
The Duke of the Abruzzi: An Explorer’s Life
. Seattle, 1997.
Viesturs, Ed. “Russian-American K2
Expedition.” The American Alpine Journal:
1993. Golden, Colo., 1993.
Viesturs, Ed, with David Roberts. No
Shortcuts to the Top: Climbing the World’s
14 Highest Peaks. New York, 2006.
Wiessner, Fritz H. “The K2 Expedition of
1939.” Appalachia, June 1956.
Wilkinson, Freddie. “Perfect Chaos.” Rock
and Ice, December 2008.
Copyright © 2009 by Ed Viesturs and David
Roberts
All rights reserved.
Published in the United States by
Broadway Books, an imprint of the Crown
Publishing Group, a division of Random
House, Inc., New York.
www.crownpublishing.com
BROADWAY BOOKS and the Broadway
Books colophon are trademarks of Random
House, Inc.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-
Publication Data
Viesturs, Ed.
K2 : life and death on the world’s most
dangerous mountain / Ed
Viesturs with David Roberts.
p. cm.
eISBN: 978-0-7679-3261-5
1. Mountaineering—Pakistan—K2
(Mountain)
2. Mountains—Pakistan—K2
(Mountain)—Difficulty of ascent.
3. Mountaineers—Pakistan—K2 (Mountain)
4. Mountaineering
accidents—Pakistan—K2 (Mountain) 5. K2
(Pakistan : Mountain)—
Description and travel. I. Roberts, David. II.
Title.
GV199.44.P18V54 2009
796.522095491—dc20
2009016390
v3.0